 I think they're nervous because we have such a large group of friends. We're not used to so many people in the audience. moment of silence makes me very nervous do we need to call frank okay we're okay you got a recorder we're live streaming and we're live recording and we're not going to get my echo the recording is not showing up on our site my site the recording live stream webinar is being live streamed. The webinar is being live streamed. If not, Kathy Ho is going to diligently take meeting notes. I will. We're good for something. We're good for something. There we go. Right. This is awesome. I still can't. we're good for something we're good there we go right why can't you get connected because that's where something is having to do okay we are going to try this again good morning everyone hopefully you're not going to hear an echo so again my name is dawn chang and i'm actually confirmed so i'm not nominee and i'm not yes i'm actually so yeah i'm good i think so at least i may be dreaming but i think i'm good i think i'm i'm actually confirmed so i'm going to read through some of our our meeting protocols we're holding this meeting as a hybrid meeting some of us are in person in the kalani moka building boardroom in honolulu and we're also holding this meeting remotely via zoom and you can watch it on youtube for those here to testify in zoom we will let you, we will let you into the meeting when we will be hearing the item you wish to testify on. Please remember to turn off your YouTube when you're in the main Zoom meeting room, or we will hear an echo just like how you heard mine. When you enter, please be sure to keep your camera off and microphone muted until the commission calls you for public testimony. We ask that members of the public testifying on an agenda item limit your testimony to no more than three minutes so that everyone has a chance to participate. And please remember not to use a chat for any comments because that presents a sunshine issue. People may also testify via telephone at the number posted online. Please let our commission secretary know your name and what agenda item you wish to testify on. So we can call on you at that item. You may email your testimony via nadine.h.pomeroy at hawaii.gov or to dlnr.seaworm at hawaii.gov. For all participants, I would like to stress the importance of speaking slowly and clearly. Before speaking, please state your name and identify yourself for the record. I will now read the contested case statement which is not on my agenda okay we are really providing a very good impression colin do you have it i took on my old agenda ah i do find it in some of the matters before the commission a person may wish to request a contested case hearing. If such a request is made before the Commission's decision, then the Commission will consider the request first before considering the merits of the item before. A person who wants a contested case may also wait until the Commission decides the issue, then request a contested case after the decision. It is up to you. Any requests must be made orally by the end of the meeting and followed up in writing within 10 days. If no request for contested cases made, the commission will make a decision. The department will treat the decision as final and proceed accordingly. In addition, the commission may also go into executive session pursuant to 92-5A4 Hawaii Revised Statutes in order to consult with its attorney on questions and issues pertaining to the commission's powers, duties, privileges, immunitiesities and liabilities i will now take a roll call of the commissioners please state your name and if you are participating remotely please state whether anyone else is in the room i'll first go in the in the room kathy kathleen ho i'm in person. Thank you. Let's, Mike Buck. Aloha, Michael Buck, alone. Okay, Neil. Aloha, my name is Neil Hannes, I'm alone in my office. Dr. Aurora Kagawa Viviani. Aurora Kagawa Viviani and I'm alone in my office. Thank you. Wayne Katayama oh good morning wayne katayama i'm here alone in my office thank you and paul meyer good morning chair um this is paul meyer i'm at home alone in my office thank you thank you very much um i will also introduce our staff that's present we have deputy Deputy Kaleo Manuel, Nadine Pomeroy, the Secretary and Deputy Attorney General Colin Lau. With respect to agenda items, we will hear items generally in the following order that's been on the agenda, unless there's been a request for an item to be moved up there are two items that will be moved up item c1 and c2 do i have a motion to agenda the item to take the item to take the items out of order so moved do i have a second okay paul has a motion has been made and seconded to accept the move of items of c1 and c2 all in favor do i need to do a roll call for the first vote okay um i'll do a roll call so um miss palmer can you do a roll call commissioner holmes aye commissioner buck aye commissioner hannes aye commissioner kagawa viviani aye commissioner kateyama aye commissioner meyer aye aye a motion has been passed so those two items will be taken as a move up However, I will take the first item which is the approval of the minutes of March 21 2023. Miss Palmer has there been any testimony on the, on the meeting, meeting notes. Okay. Any members of the public here would like to testify on the meeting notes. Commissioners any corrections or comments to the meeting notes commissioners any corrections or comments to the meeting notes mike buck yes yeah i have no problem with the minutes and we sure you know for nadine to do word for word transcriptions uh if that's required that's great it seems like it's a lot of work but we do appreciate the detailed minutes and i'm happy to make a motion to improve the minutes and marks thank you i did see commissioner kagawa viviani um i have some minor corrections all right go ahead so i i have i don't have them by line number but i have them flagged on a on I'm a doc. I can send it. Just, oh, it's long. Do you want me to identify all of them? Can you just email them to Nadine? I will. Were they substantive comments or are they technical? Technical. Okay. So I'm going to take your word for it assuming it doesn't affect the substantive changes to to the notes do i have a motion to approve the meeting notes of march 21st 2023 subject to the proposed amendments by commissioner kagawa viviani moved to approve do I have a second? Kathy hold up. A motion has been made and seconded to approve the meeting notes. All in favor? Aye. Any opposed? The motion has passed. We will now move on to item C1. It's a move up item it's an informational briefing on the pacific drought knowledge exchange by dr ryan longman university of hawaii sure yes i'll introduce dr longman that will give this presentation thank you very much good morning commissioner chair um like to introduce dr. Ryan Longman with the University of Hawaii. He's also a fellow at the East-West Center and an associate researcher at the Water Resources Research Center up at UH. He's gonna give a great presentation on the Pacific Drought Knowledge Exchange. So with that, I'll introduce Dr. Longman, right? Thank you very much thank you for being here Dr. Lohman I appreciate you being here in person thank you for having me can everybody see the screen commissioners very good just run it through this way it's jamming on me i'll just run through your slides if that's okay or do you want uh can you put it in powerpoint right try it there you go and i'll just uh okay so um commissioners chair deputies thank you for having me today uh ryan longman i'm a fellow at east west center i'm also associate climatologist at the Water Resources Research Center at UH and I did my bachelor's degree, my master's degree and PhD at UH. I worked with Tom Giamalucca for my master's in dissertation work. Next slide please. Today I'm here to tell you about a project called the Pacific Drought Knowledge Exchange or the PDKE as we call it. It'sD.: And today i'm going to just give you a brief overview of how we got to this point with the PDK what we're doing now currently and where we're headed and before I really get into the guts of the. Dr. David Art, M.D.: project, I want to kind of frame this in a jamming in this this idea of the data lifecycle and the data lifecycle is kind of a comprehensive idea of how we understand and look at data and all the many parts of it. So we have data monitoring, which is basically measuring data in the field. We're talking temperature, rainfall, all of these different elements. Folks, I think, are familiar with the Hawaii Mesonet, which is being installed right now with over up to 100 climate stations across Hawaii, led by the Water Resource Research Center and Tom Giambalucca. Then there's data processing. We get the data. What do we do with it? We have to make sure it's homogenous, that it's we're able to get rid of outliers. Combined data sets is a huge step to that. Then there's data storage, so where do you keep data so it's safe that you can access it, and then there's data access, meaning how does the general public or people that need it actually access it. So you need to put a lot of investment into that. Then there's data analysis, so you have the data now, what do you do with it, how do you detect those trends, how do you do, you know, find the information that you're looking for in a cohesive manner. Then there's data products, so once you get to those conclusions, how do you create the products that can show these findings in a way that's digestible by the general public or by anyone for that matter? And then finally, a big part of this data life cycle and something that my research has moved into considerably over the last couple of years is data dissemination. So once you have these data products, excuse me, how do you get them out to the people that need them the most, right? So this is the data life cycle and the project I'm talking about today is kind of encompassing a lot of these elements. Next slide, please. So how did we get here? Well, some anecdotal evidence over the last couple years has shown us that drought is increasing in Hawaii. This recent study by Dr. Abby Fraser has showed us that drought frequency is increasing, drought duration, how long droughts are lasting, and the drought magnitude, how severe the droughts are. So, this is on a decadal time scale, and we did this analysis a few years ago, and then we updated it recently and just published this paper in the Journal of Sustainability. And it shows us that we are seeing these trends towards a drier climate and more frequent and longer lasting and more powerful droughts. We also had some earlier work before the project launched where the Forest Service put out this technical report on managing the effects of drought in Hawaii and the US-aff US affiliate Pacific Islands. It was a great project. They looked at drought, how resource managers were looking, managing drought in different sectors, but there were some gaps in it. There was also this kind of need for resource managers to be more involved in the process. Data was identified as hard to get, not easily, not just get access, but how to analyze it there really was no kind of central clearinghouse of data and there really were no formal communication mechanisms between the research community and the managers on the ground so this uh prompted this idea of a drought knowledge exchange so funding from the pacific islands climate adaptation science center we started started this project to create a knowledge exchange here in Hawaii. And it's based on these four principles. The first one is to kind of provide resource managers with sector specific or sorry, sector and site specific information about their individual land areas. So instead of like looking at one map and finding your place on the map, pulling that information out for those individual geographies improved technical assistance so helping resource managers access data that they may not either have the capability to or the time to to access it the third one is to better more comprehensive information so leveraging our knowledge on data and providing more data that may not have been managers may not have been aware of and then a more collaborative transfer information environment we call this co-production and this is a key element of the PDKE and really all of the work that I do now and I'm going to have a slide here just to show you the what this means so a typical information transfer model we have the what I call the ivory tower approach this is when a bunch of scientists get together and they create some type of product and they launch it off the tower and they hope that it lands in some decision-makers hands and they hope that it's used, but we don't know that's really gonna happen. You know, it's just kind of brushing your fingers and hoping they move on to the next things. The other type of model is the loading dock approach where maybe the research manager or the scientist is tasked with a particular idea of, okay, do this create this product they create it they back it up and they um they drop it off to the to the stakeholder and they pull away and they hope that it's useful right so these are the kind of typically what what gets done in this academic environment um but we call this a one-way transfer of. What we're doing here is a coproduction model. This is when the researcher and the decision maker are in conversations from the very beginning. And for the PDK project, we kind of actually had some of the decision makers write the proposal with us. So we work together and then there's a back and forth exchange and the products that are created are then relevant to the actual decision maker because they had their input from the very beginning. And we call this a two-way information transfer and a co-production model. And this means that really the scientists are actively getting feedback as the process continues. Next slide, please. So we piloted this with three partners in Hawaii, Monica Kahalawai on Maui, Pua Vava and the Hawaii Volcanoes on the Big Island. And again, the project was funded by the podcast. And we basically met with these folks early on in the project. We had some stakeholder consultations with them. November 19, we went to the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. We went to Pu'u Wa'awa in February, and then everybody knows what happened in March of 2020. We moved to this virtual environment with Mauna Kahala Wai, and we had less success with them in the project, I think maybe because we didn't get the initial stakeholder consultation off the ground, but overall the project was a huge success. We had a couple of products come out of it. One of our crown jewels is our CCBD portfolio. This is a site-specific climate portfolio for an individual geography. It contains information about climate. It's about 35 pages. It's an automated thing where we go in and we get all of the gridded products available, rainfall, temperature, climate, relative humidity, land cover, anything that's gridded for the state. And then we put in a shapefile or basically a geographic domain, and we pull out all of that information for that individual file. So for example, here, Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, we're getting all the information for just the park boundaries. We do this for watersheds, we can do this for, you know, forest reserves. We could do this for elementary schools. We could do this for anywhere in the state. We've made about over a hundred of these portfolios for folks so far. They contain a bunch of information like climate characteristics. They have monthly rainfall rainfall temperature trend variability ecological stuff we have the future climate projections of rainfall and temperature historical drought time series and data and then we even have some analyses and summaries we have a paragraph that you can cut out of the portfolio and put right into your proposal if you wanted to describe what's going on with your individual geography. Next slide, please. We've also created these plain language fact sheets for all both of our stakeholders in the pilot project. We have plain language information about El Nino, future climates, historical drought, fire risk, and these were created also in the co-production model. And in particularly like Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, they wanted fact sheets to give to their employees and they didn't want them to be gloom and doom. They wanted them to be empowering, teach them about natural resources, about climate and weather, and have them feel like they can be empowered to make resource management decisions to protect the park. Pula Va Va works with a lot of community groups. They wanted their fact sheets very plain language. They wanted the community to be able to connect with the science and the um the data that is associated with this particular area so the fact sheets were a pretty big success as well we also did a drought needs assessment um where you know a master's student melissa coons basically went around and interviewed folks across the state and she also created a few fact sheets and she created this drought needs assessment we had Dr. Katie Kamelamela provide information on um on indigenous drought knowledge assessments and we are preparing this into a formal report which we'll be publishing uh this summer as soon as things kind of die down from the from the semester we also ran a adaptation planning and practice course an eight-week course here in Hawaii with about 40 different participants from different organizations. The project was based on teaching folks how to go through this workbook process of how to adapt to climate change under different, with a different kind of scenarios and different options on how they best want to manage their land. It was put on by the, by NIACS, which is a federal agency on the mainland. We have published this also this workshop in BAMS, which is a high scientific journal, high level kind of plain language journal. And that was kind of a big accomplishment for the project and for to get Hawaii in this example, put up on this national stage. Next slide, please. We also translated the fact sheets into a little Hawaii. Alyssa, Dr. Alyssa Anderson did the translations and these are also been well-received by the community. She translated all 10 fact sheets on a really, what was a monumental effort on doing this. But yeah, she's recently joined the PDK team full time. All right, so that's everything we did to this point what are we doing now we're keeping pretty busy uh this is our stewardship team we meet about once a week uh to kind of keep things going Dr. Abby Frazier, Clark University and UH and Dr. Christian Giardina at the U.S. Forest Service and Dr. Alyssa Anderson and then these technical folks who are supporting a lot of the projects as well. Well, first project we're working on is the Hawaii Rangeland Information Portal. This is a decision support tool for ranchers. It helps ranchers effectively manage their drought by getting easy access to data and planning for drought by, you know, getting information about, you know, forage production and trying to just understand their geography and their climate better. So this is the portal. We're going to launch it in the fall at the hawaii cattlemen's council meeting but basically a real snapshot of this is you pick an individual geography you can get a three-month projection of what rainfall and forage production is going to be like based on el nino what's going on in the current um in the atmosphere and what has happened in the past so it's an almanac perspective it doesn't say use something fancy to tell, what's going on in the current in the atmosphere and what has happened in the past. So it's an almanac perspective. It doesn't say use something fancy to tell you what's going to happen in the future. It says this is what happened in the past during a strong El Nino. This is what we expect in the future. You can enter in information about how many cattle you're managing, what kind of grass you have, and you can get an output of what your site's going to look like, how many grazing days you're expected to have. The portal also has a bunch of other information about site-specific stuff. And one thing we're working on now is a dashboard for folks in the field to, or actually anybody, ranchers, agricultural producers, anybody that wants easy to read, simple climate information in the palm of their hand. We're developing a phone app for this also. They can look on this and see what was yesterday's rainfall, what was last month's rainfall, and is that rainfall wetter or drier than it is usual. We also have temperature. What was yesterday's temperature? Is the temperature warmer than it usually is? What's the minimum? What's the maximum? We have a 12 month drought outlook here, right? There's no, this is a fancy metric, but we got rid of all that. Is it drought or is it no drought? And how many months are we in drought? And then finally, we have our information about El Nino. What did we expect here for this particular month? What's the historical average? What's the wet La Nina average? And what's the wet La Nina minimum? So we're providing folks not only just just the average but what what what could potentially happen and this is still in development we're working on ways to make it intuitive. We have some stakeholder consultation with ranchers coming up in June where we're going to sit down with them and really figure out how to make this work in a way that's meaningful to them. Also upgrading our CCVD portfolios. Like I said, we've made about a hundred of these, probably 120, 30 at this point for everybody across the state that you can imagine, but there's still much more to do, but we've added about five or 10 new slides, new data, new information. We are also bringing in a cultural knowledge. We have Dr. Alyssa Anderson's helping us with this. We're actually pulling Ahupua our poor information and providing that to to folks to let them know the names, the Hawaiian names of their hope, who are that their geography is listed in there might be several of them and providing some cultural information in the portfolios as well. The third project, which is not so relevant maybe here but we are scaling up some work in the US. We're making some rainfall maps for Guam. We are also creating fact sheets for Guam. We have a proposal in right now to do some work in American Samoa as well. And the fourth project, we are scaling up the PDKE in Hawaii. We are working with some additional partners. It took us a while to kind of mobilize this funding, but we are going to be doing the same things that we were doing with Pula Vava and hawaii volcanoes national park with other partners that we've identified so where are we headed now with this um aside from all the things we're currently working on one of the main things is linking things to the http or the hawaii climate data portal i could give a whole nother talk on this and i told myself i wasn't going to but uh the hawaii climate data portal is uh recently it's recently come online as a state-of-the-art tool to capture all of the near real-time data in hawaii feed it into the portal and create gridded products that are at a near real-time basis so right now we have monthly rainfall available but we're going to have daily rainfall available we have daily temperature we have other things coming online vegetation and relative humidity and all these other different variables so we're now linking a lot of the pdke products the hawaii rangeland information portal to the http so that we have this information coming in the most up-to-date stuff so i have a proposal in right now to build the ccbd portfolio that i told you about into the http so think about it now if you want a portfolio you I told you about into the HTTP. So think about it now, if you want a portfolio, you email me or the person that works for me and we give it back to you, right? It's a static document. But what if you could go to the portal and you could just hit a button and get your information from the portal, just with one touch of a button. The cyber infrastructure folks that we're working with are telling me that you could even draw a geography, upload your own geography. And what's unique about this is the portfolio you create button. The cyber infrastructure folks that we're working with are telling me that you could even draw a geography, upload your own geography. And what's unique about this is the the portfolio you create today will have yesterday's data in it. Right. So it's going to be a near real time thing. So I'm waiting for the funding to be approval for that. But we're ready to go on on making this available. And then this becomes an amazing educational tool for anybody across the states teachers that want to develop it into curriculum resource managers that that want the most up-to-date information. So it's kind of combining this project of the PDKE with the HEDP. It's acronym soup, but it really means a lot for folks in Hawaii that want access to data. We have a lot of new products coming online. Haima is sponsoring our fire risk and fire warning maps. They'll also be available through the hdp we'll bring some of that information into our portfolios land cover maps vegetation mentioned that in the daily rainfall so these things are really coming next level for data access in hawaii we're expanding our efforts in the us api i have a couple grants that are pending one of them just got approved to work with the National Weather Service on doing some flood forecasting for American Samoa, working with Kevin Kodama on that here in Hawaii but also the National Weather Service in American Samoa or for collaborators on the proposal, and what are we supposed to research centers going to be running that. And then making some fact sheets and doing some other things in the US API as well. And I'm also working for the HTTP to develop a Pacific Center portal that you can get just actually Pacific data through the HTTP as well. And the big thing is that we're trying to sustain this now. So I've been keeping this alive by writing grants and keeping a couple employees going. It's as soon as one grants done, I'm writing in the next one. We had a kickoff meeting um and this is a this logo soup here is not a official logo it's just kind of my ideal of how we keep this thing going we find folks to support some of the projects in a more sustainable way and uh we formalize this governance structure we have another um we have the stewardship team that i mentioned we also have a steering committee that meets quarterly, Neil's involved in that. And then we have an advisory council that meets annually. And we're trying to put together another meeting in October. And in that meeting, we're trying to bring together some funders to see how we can do this more sustainably and not have this be one grant at a time. Right now, I think I'm managing seven different grants to support two different people on various HTTP and PDK projects. So it would be good to figure out a new way to move forward with that. I always want to put a plug in for the Hawaii mezzanine that folks are not aware of this it's a state of the art climate monitoring system, and it all starts with monitoring I can't create any of these products without data. And when this comes online it's going to be a state of the art monitoring system for the state, we're going to be able to look across these amazing gradients of climate we have in Hawaii, bring that data into these portfolios to these portals, to these fire risk fire warning models, all these things that we're developing are going to be next level because they're going to have that data and information they need to inform them. And then if folks do social media, I do a weekly post on Thursday to kind of let folks know what's going on with the Mesonet, the PDKE, and the HTTP. I try to have a cultural component to that also. We'll talk about new research, ongoing products, and just try to keep the community connected with that. And finally, I have a young undergraduate that really helps me with that. So I give her a shout out since I've never actually made a post myself, but I really appreciate her. So and then we finally, I just want to kind of wrap this up with the coming back here to this data life cycle and really how important it is and how every one of those elements really feeds into that data dissemination. You can't have data dissemination without data monitoring and there's a lot of unsung heroes along the way, a lot of cyber infrastructure folks, data scientists, climate scientists that really don't get to sit up here and present like I do all the time, but they're the kind of backbone of what's going on here in Hawaii. So it's a really unique time in Hawaii. A lot of folks are coming together, silos are coming down, the data information and access has never been more easily accessible and the products are kind of coming out. And with the Mesonet establishment, the PDKE, the HTTP, it's really a bright future for us to understand what's going on climatically and for us to develop the tools and the resources we need to effectively adapt to these changing environmental conditions. And on that, I think i'll say mahalo that was awesome that was awesome i mean thank you very much dr long and i really appreciate that um i'm going to open it up for questions by the commission to dr longman on his presentation or information? I have a question. Yes, please go ahead. Have you been... Are you coordinating or is public health, the School of Public Health interested in your research and the effects climate change has on public health and the environment? It's an open research question. I'm sure there's an interest on that. I'm not particularly working with anybody at public health and the environment? I mean, it's an open research question. I'm sure there's an interest on that. I'm not particularly working with anybody at public health, but it's certainly an area to explore. And certainly something that they might be able to utilize some of this data to do. As you're going through this, I was thinking that this is something that we could probably use. Yeah, so it's just a matter of getting the data, to finally identifying the type of data needed and getting it to the people that need it right and that's what we do yeah thank you thank you very much i'm gonna there's aurora's got her hand and after aurora um neil go ahead commissioner buck had his hand up first right oh mike oh i see um are you there, Mike? Dr. Longman, that is the most precise, accessible presentation I've ever heard from University of Hawaii. So thank you so much for you and your team that has done the hard work. And must be my bad, because many of those products I've never seen before, I was not aware of. So I'm gonna blame that on me. I got one question and one comment for future potential work for you guys. The question is, I know these are based on certain climatic models. What's the plan to actually verify the models and update some of the existing fact sheets that you have? The question, that's kind of the question. And the comment is a future need that we have, and it really relates to an issue we're dealing with today, is the commission has really looked at some of these large episodic storm events as opportunities for our dams and reservoirs for water storage what we do lack sometimes is the actual science that can kind of predict the amounts of some of these episodic storm events that can help us do some of the financial analysis to really help majority of private landowners to see if they can maintain these dead dams and reservoirs so i know episodic storm events are hard to model but that that is one data element that um as you look for the future needs that i know the water commission committee but and again thank you and your team for a great presentation and great work. Thank you. Well, to to your question, let me respond to the comment first. I will say that with the the Mesonet coming online, this is data that's available in five minute resolution. So we might not be able to predict what's going to happen in the future, but we can get a really good idea of how much rainfall the storms are bringing to the island now once we have that high resolution data. So I think that that could be a model for what could happen in the future. If you can determine how storms might change, you can base it on the information that you have. But until we have that really high temporal resolution data, which is, I didn't mention, but the second a meso station gets installed and we have about 20 installed right now, we start using that data, the minute it gets installed, we start about 20 installed right now we start using that data the minute it gets installed we start pulling it into the portal so we're we're in real time now with data acquisition and product development uh in terms of the um the question so a lot of the products we're developing like the rainfall maps the temperature maps they're all uh work that we've spent years on we've been working on the hawaii climate data portal for a decade and conceptually for two decades. If not, if you go back to Tom's tenure, probably four decades, and I don't want to date Tom too much, but it's been a while. So the work that we do, the mapping, we publish that in peer-reviewed scientific journals. The future projections and things like that, that's not in our shop. I mean, it it's on the periphery and we can only use what's out there so when folks develop something we make use of it but um you know it's just a matter of uh you know more folks putting their head down and looking into the future and then us utilizing and leveraging their efforts to get that information to folks in hawaii thank you aurora go ahead i'm going to defer to Commissioner Hannis, who had his hand up before me, and I'm called from third, and then I think Commissioner Myers. Okay, you're very you're very courteous over. I appreciate that. And but my question actually builds on Commissioner Buck's comments. So that's I think it's a good thing thank you very much for that presentation that was excellent and the comments i have are partly directed to you but also i think maybe uh involve our staff so maybe they should be prepared to answer some of these if if uh if that's most appropriate i was struck by your data utilization your data lifecycle style, lifecycle slide. And there was something missing on that. And you get to dissemination. And I guess what I was looking for was data utilization. You know, once we have the information, what do we actually do with it? And I think it's really important. And that's why I said the implications of that may not be so much on you as so much on on our uh dnr uh leadership and so forth that really recognizes what how then do we take this and and and have sounder policies because then i looked at your co your models your co-production model which I appreciate is better than the other options that you presented before it but I guess we're not just looking at the value of information for its own sake so that we can adapt to uh here's the trajectory and here's where we're going to end up so here's where how we're going to live I think a part of our job is to really optimize develop optimal strategies and move us toward a strategic optimization model so that we're again sensibly taking the information we have in making better policies now where it comes back to commissioner Buck is you know we just read in the paper uh civil beat and so forth today we're thinking about what what do you do with one reservoir kalihiwai reservoir on kaw Kaua'i, we're going to close another reservoir, and so forth. There's a big dispute over the investment value of that and who bears that investment and so forth. Those are great examples of how we need to take the information that you're providing and really put it in the hands of policymakers and make better decisions, really, that are informed by your science. I'm not sure if that's a statement or a question, but I'd really like some discussion on that from both you as well as our staff. Thank you. I can start with a comment, and thank you for that. I often get this question or a similar question and in my point, my capacity is at a limit when it gets to that dissemination point considering all the things that I'm doing. You want your data and your work to have value and that's like, I'm not in that ivory tower approach. So when I get to the dissemination part, you would hope that in the co-production model that you're actually creating something that somebody wants and they'll utilize it. I have gotten feedback from people like Sierra McDaniel at Hawaii Volcanoes National Park who has used the information for to make restoration decisions on planting, you know, silver sword species and for managing invasive species during certain times of year. I'm getting some anecdotal information from folks that are using it for, in terms of the ranchers in Hawaii. So the ranchers have to make decisions and what's gonna happen is they're gonna either make the decision with no information or they're gonna make it based on some information that we provide them. Now I'm not telling them what to do, but it's a piece of information they can have, that they might not have access to on the other hand. But yeah, all I can say is that, you know, we want to create the data and information, the most relevant information for folks to utilize and find out what they need and give it to them in a format they can use. And how they use it, though, I mean, if there's a place for me or my team in that sphere, we're happy to engage. But I guess that kind of, it that kind of left for the user at that point. Kaleo looks like he's come off mute. So maybe he's going to add to this. But the ranching is a good example. I mean, you could look at your data and one decision you could make is to adapt and say reduce stocking rate. But when we have a community goals to increase food production, then we've got to take your data and figure out okay how do we have the stocking rate we want on our ranch lands uh that that meet our food production goals and yet really makes sense uh with respect to the burden upon the land and the utilization of the resource we have and then go back to commissioner buck's point it might mean we have to make investment that's perhaps both public and private in the reservoir systems that better hold capacity so that we can support those goals. So that's what I'm missing. So, you know, again, it's not all your kuleana. We need our public policy representatives in this to kind of step forward. And is that what you're going to do, Kaleo? Are you going to talk to me about how we're stepping forward on that uh no um i mean i think the goal would be to utilize the data and you know both in short term and long term decision making so you know i'm reflecting on our kuleana to manage permits, for example, and bring forward recommendations of commission. So to the extent that we have, you know, live a robust data set to work off of the better. But the trends are really what we've been most interested in, I think, from a long-term Hawaii water plan perspective. perspective and for you folks as decision makers and policy makers um to make decisions based on new relevant hawaii specific data versus some of these larger climate models right that we've been basing our decisions off of so um neil i don't know do you have anything you want to add from the staff though okay that's an initial reaction i think to your your question commissioner hannes thank you chair thank you aurora is it your turn now um thanks ryan so i guess for others ryan and i were in the same same lab he was finishing his phd as i was on the way so it's really awesome to hear the update and where things are now um and and yeah and where things are headed so I guess I had a question and then I had an offer a couple questions one for the um Hawaii rangeland information portal which is super cool are you folks thinking about sort of intermediate range like like two to three year sort of projections? Cause I think that sometimes the scale at which decision-making happens, if you've got to manage head and all, and it's also like the El Nino kind of windows that are extremes that really swing decision-making. Three months is good, but like, I remember working in cattle country and those that window of time was kind of important. So yeah, so the ranchers that we've talked to and we work with the Hawaii Cattlemen's Council, I think that you know on a day to day kind of management level, we're finding is that they're interested in the short term, mostly, and, but I think it's probably a larger planning, you know, some larger planning very careful about what I do. So it's an almanac perspective, right? So it just says that this happened past during an LENO. So this is what happens on average is what happens. So it's a, it's a really kind of careful way to get into that space in terms of projections. Now we can show the data and talk about, you know, what's happening, what happened like yesterday, last month, what we think is going to happen. But I don't know if I have the capabilities to move too far into the future, but if that information is available and it's available in a robust way, we're happy to provide it to anybody that wants it and put it into the portfolio is about something that we can we can do on a gridded basis. So this is like really translational work, making it accessible. In that case, yeah I have a follow up or preceding question which is you. You were talking about the data life cycle. but and then about the knowledge exchange, which I think kind of closed the loop. You know I noticed there was an arrow back but you know we start with the kind of sensor data. I think you and I are very familiar with but what room is there to include other indicators based on the feedback with stakeholders? You know, like maybe we're not measuring the right things. Is there a way to incorporate those recommendations? Maybe not in your project, but are they documented and placed somewhere for future? Maybe we're not measuring the right metrics that matter to the stakeholders. So yeah, I took a couple of slides out when I put this together, but I do have a slide that kind of explains that process where the portfolio is something we can do for anybody. So we make the portfolio, the next step would be to sit down with the stakeholder and go through the portfolio and say, is the information there that you need and what else can we provide for you there? And then the idea of the knowledge exchange is the document lessons learned to get any information we can and compile it into kind of a centralized clearing house to create these drought needs assessments these things that are, you know, kind of encapsulate kind of the broader issues, and maybe even specific issues that might be relevant to other folks. So there is that part of the exchange also is kind of, you know, bringing together information from individuals and putting it in a cohesive way where others can kind of learn from those lessons. And so that's kind of where the incorporation of local knowledge comes in, but it's not something you carry out, it's just something you document. Well, I'm not really carrying on anything, it's not something you carry out it's just something you you document. Well, i'm not really carrying on anything it's more yet documenting it and and and disseminating it to others that might be interested in that in that information. Yeah, and I forgot my last comment. but thanks so much again, and oh, the offers maybe maybe as I, you know, sit on the commission for a couple more years. We can have more informal dialogues and and think about ways that the continuing work of Hcdb and Pdke can more directly guide commission work. And maybe this is for Kaleo speaking to Commissioner bucks question or and Commissioner Hannes maybe a future this is focused on drought but I think Dr. Yunfan Tsang is really where the flooding issues when we're thinking about extremes she's doing a lot of work on flooding and there's going to be more work done on flooding she works with folks on Kauai as well. So that would be a good complimentary informational briefing. Yeah, so don't let the drought in Pacific Drought Knowledge Exchange fool you. You know, we're happy to bring in flooding information too. And I don't know, I don't think we'll change the acronym, but there's also, HAIMA, I mentioned funding the fire risk and warning tool. We're also going to have a flood risk and warning tool. And that's going to be at a very high resolution. So we're real thankful for that funding stream. Syed Batini at the Water Resource Research Center is leading that effort. And that'll be a gridded product as well. So the portfolios and eventually all these tools will also incorporate the flooding information. And I know Dr. Yin-Fan Tsang is working on developing a soil moisture, gritted soil moisture at a really high temporal resolution. And that's gonna really allow us to look at something called effective precipitation. So how much rainfall is actually becoming available, how much is running off. Eventual goal of the HDP and all of these efforts is to get to water balance, which I think the commission will be most interested in finding out, you know, when we're getting these events, where the rainfall is actually going, how much is going running off, how much is filling aquifers, how much is evaporating and how much is, you know, being stored in aquifers. So I think that that's the ultimate goal of HDP. It takes a while to get to that part because evapotranspiration is so hard to do, but we're a couple of years out from really providing this high level water balance for the whole state. Thank you. Wayne, I've got your hand up. But I think Paul was waiting in queue. I got to put numbers on your hands. Okay, Paul. Yeah. Thank you, Wayne. Doctor, I just wanted to say briefly, thank you very much for your work. You know, been involved in the water and water management business for over 40 years in a way. And it's a your the information you're providing is tremendously valuable to water utilities public and private professionals farmers ranchers. Paul Minehart, You name it, and it, you know in the public in terms of warning of drought events and flood events it's please keep up the good work it's really proud of what you're doing and it fills a tremendous void looking back Thank you. Thank you, thank you. a tremendous void looking back. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Paul. Wayne? Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Long. But for me, I think it's helped me put things in perspective. It was a pretty detailed presentation, and I think the data that you're gathering is tremendous. But from your research, what do you view as the timing of these climate cycles? I know that you're looking at very short-term type of information decision-making, but what would be sort of a cycle from your viewpoint that we should be concerned about? You know, you've been asked by certain other commissioners about how do we do long-term work to sort of do this water balance. So how do we get there? And secondly, I guess, who are the decision makers that you are working with for developing your models? And lastly, how do you determine what is the specific areas that you'd be doing work at? Is there some kind of priority where you're looking at locations that are high risk or high tolerance or low tolerance for weather swings and that you know sort of helps you put the program in perspective for me i should i should have wrote down those questions oh i'm sorry we go backwards first uh so in terms of who we're working with on i know i don't want to muddle projects here because i have my hand in a few different pots but the pdke project we kind of it really starts with the individual stakeholder and that it kind of involves like it's just we we put the information out there we talk with folks uh we work with you know uh it kind of involves a kind of a network approach um so there's really um there's no like way of targeting anyone in particularly it's like who's willing to work with us and how much capacity do we have to help them you know so we're open for ideas on that but it's not really um a model on how we select people it's it's kind of you know um there's the portfolio i can make it for anybody i met a guy in a park in manila Valley Park and made him one. So I mean, I think we can do I didn't have something that I have someone that I paid employee that will make one for anybody so anyone's in the room right now wants a portfolio just email me a shape file or let me know what you're interested in and I'll have one for you by the end of the day. That's how fast we do it, but, um, but yeah so that was first question. In terms of the modeling, I think there was a question about how we're developing these models. Well, who are the decision makers that you're collaborating with at these various sites that you've selected? Yeah, so, you know, again, it really depends. So it's, you know, it's the resource management unit in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. It's, you know, the manager of the watershed. We're in Guam. I'm working with somebody at the university and at the Weary Center over there. So it really depends on who's the point of contact for an individual who manages land resources. That's really the person on the ground, the ranchers. It's the individual, the person in the ranch who's actually managing the livestock not the administrator so it's really we want to work with the people that are actually going to use the tools use the data that's kind of something we try to identify early on and i'm working with the hawaii cattlemen's council right now and we're setting up these meetings and i'm like i don't want to meet with the person who owns the ranch i want to meet with the person that's going to actually manage the livestock and see if this tool can help them. We work with NRCS, also USGS and, you know, Nature Conservancy and a lot of different folks that kind of put us in touch with the right people. So it's kind of a really grassroots project. The PDK has really no model on how you find people or identify resource managers. It's and I'm sorry if it's kind of a big answer, but we're still kind of getting going with it at this point. And then your first question, sir. From your research, what is sort of the window for climate trends? The thing about climate in Hawaii is that we have this crazy inter-annual variability, which we get wet years and dry years. And we see sometimes where it doesn't line up the way we think it's going to line up. I think that what folks should be wary about is the next El Nino, because we have had eight of the last nine years have been the hottest on record and uh we are at like 45 years uh of above temperatures in the instrumental record and the next El Nino is probably going to send things off the charts that's kind of my my gut feeling on this and we've been in La Nina for the last three years so we have not felt the full effects of what the atmosphere has is doing and what the ocean is doing and I think that you know the next El Nino which could even be next winter it's going to be a really hot dry winter so that that's in the very near term I think the next El Nino is going to kind of send us into a next understanding of where the climate is going in the short term I think you know because temperature you know rainfall we don't know what's going to happen with rainfall we have some ideas we have some models that tell us one tells us it's gonna be drier one tells it's gonna be wetter it's not really something that we can put our fingers down i'm careful when i talk about trends and rainfall because a trend in rainfall a lot of time depends on where you start it and where you end it so i i hesitate to say to say things about rainfall but i can say that you know um the temperature is rising and there's no stopping it and we look at the future what the models are telling us for temperature we see a much warmer environment in hawaii where species are going to have a hard time to adapt certain agricultural product products are not going to grow well and people's discomfort and health are going to be at risk and i think that that is an unavoidable consequence at this point given the trajectory that the world is on and the mitigation efforts that are that are somewhat failing somewhat working but really i think the we need to plan for a warmer world in the in the mid and and and centuries uh without really any doubt of that well i think that's the challenge for this group is how do we protect our water resources so we can continue to enjoy a healthy lifestyle in a vibrant lifestyle so i think this research is key and you know to commissioner hannis and commissioner buck's comments is so we really need to have the ability to make long-term decisions or decisions that will protect our future so hopefully that you can help us you know there's a lot of water management areas of maui that probably could use your work and your help anyway thank you very much for your presentation thank you for your comments thank you commissioners i just have some final comments um i really appreciated this you'll find i'm a real process and community engagement person in my view this the tool is somewhat leveling the playing field it provides the community's access to information without having to pay for a consultant. So it really helps us with informed decision making. A lot of times DLNR are far beyond just water issues. It's the whole climate change between OCCL and shoreline erosion and looking at trends. But I think for purposes of the Water Commission, the tool provides us better, a better information to make informed decision making especially we may have to start putting conditions about you know adaptation maybe we have to make changes more often in our our long-term water leases some of these are very long and we see that the changes may be much more frequent. And so we have to be able to adjust, think about today, what's, you know, what are some of these trends looking in the future, but giving us greater flexibility to incorporate those into some of our permit conditions. So I think that this is an extremely helpful tool that I am certain the Water Commission staff is going to consider as part of their checkoff list when they're looking at all the different databases that this is going to be one that they're going to look at. So I am extremely appreciative for the good work that you and your staff have done. I appreciate the cultural integration. Too often we are not incorporating Indigenous knowledge and recognizing that value. So you've really, you've come to us with a very whole package and it's very, you know, a lot of the issues that people have criticized science on, you seem to have incorporated a lot of that to create a real good balance and great credibility and integrity into the document. So thank you on behalf of the commission for the good work. And I'm certain our department's gonna use you a lot more often. So thank you very much. Chair. Yes, go ahead. I might, thanks for those comments. And I really liked your idea about this being part of the protocol of our staff to indicate whether or not matters that come before us have gone have been calibrated against the uh the various data sets that we have and you know i think about the agency reviews and the kapokai analysis and and so forth is it possible to kind of really highlight what those relevant data sets are and indicate in every case, just as a tool and kind of a template for staff to make sure that they're checked for the, there's a review against those data sets on matters that come before us? Kaleo, is that possible or are we do i think we do it a lot now but i mean if you created part of the template it's just it's automatic we know we got it yeah i think that's definitely something we can incorporate um a lot of our data the uh climate data discussion and dialogue happens in the water plant but as indicated last month um that come oftentimes as much as we say it's a living document it's kind of static right and so i think even utilizing these tools and building into our our routing and review we can definitely do that and look at how to build and make more submittals even more robust um so i'll work i'll take that back and we can work with staff to look at um you know how to utilize these this data in our analysis and recommendations commission yeah one one little add-on to that thanks commissioner hannis um and to deputy manual maybe um you know just as the staff use iw reds to look at what, like, there can be a formalized way to pull in the HCDP or PDK information as part of that assessment. I think that might be a tangible way to make it happen. And just thank you again, longman ryan um would you mind sharing your screen again on how to access hcdp or pdke or your contact information for the general public who might be interested in following up can we make these slides your powerpoint slides available because then we can post them on our website and people can have access yeah yeah you can links to it or something yeah i mean you can visit the if you just google the hawaii climate data portal you can access that if you just google the pacific drought knowledge exchange there's a website for that also but the hawaii climate data portal um you can go to interact the tool i didn't really get into that the the weeds on the portal but you can make a rainfall map if you want to do something higher level on the commission and actually pull data in in real time, we have API, basically a backdoor to grab the data and you can build it into whatever, you could have your own updating, monthly or daily rainfall data set on your desktop if you want to. And we have the cyber infrastructure to kind of help you do that also. So, I mean, there's a lot of ways to get the data. I mean, you don't have to email me to get the data also, but right now for the portfolio, you do have to email me or the ACDP and I can make that happen. But eventually again, it's gonna be a tool for everybody in the state. Yeah. You're too busy completing all the grants. No, really appreciate it. I have hands on the ground to help do stuff too, so yeah. That'd be great. But if we can make this available on our website so people can have access to it, that's great. Thank you again. Do we have anybody on this? Nope, okay. Anybody in the audience? Oh my gosh. Thank you so much, Dr. Wood. This was a really wonderful presentation. And can't thank you enough. Thank you very much for your good work. I am going to take a 5 min break to 1015, and then we're going to come back and we're going to see 2. been given a note the far right glass door is unlocked for access to the men's restroom across the the breezeway so you are free to do that as well so we'll come back at 10 15. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. All right, I'm going to call the meeting back to order. Thank you very much. We are now on item C2. Again, this is a non-action item. It's for information only. It's going to be a joint task force Red Hill Navy and Defense Health Agency overview and updates of defueling, site remediation and closure, Red Hill Chef recovery and monitoring and medical support to families. So General Hashimoto. Aloha, my name is Mark Hashimoto and I'm accompanied today by representatives of organizations that are involved in the defueling, the site cleanup, aquifer related activities and medical support to families. Mahalo, Chair Chang, Deputy Chair Manuel, commissioners and everybody who's tuning in for this opportunity to provide updates. Two of these organizations, Navy Region Hawaii and Naval Facilities Engineering Command or NAVFAC, you can raise your hands, have provided several detailed updates to the commission since the beginning of 2022. As for these other two organizations, they've been very, very active providing information to the general public, stakeholders, county, state, federal agencies. But this is the first time that they're going to provide that the JTF, Joint Task Force Redhill and the Defense Health Agency are going to provide information directly to the Commission. All of these organizations have made many public appearances to ensure that any questions or concerns associated with all of these aspects of the response to Redhill can be addressed. each today is going to present a short brief about what they're doing focused mainly on the updates uh to what's been going on and then following look forward to discussion thank you very much i'll turn it over to kevin mahalo good morning uh my name is colonel kevin williams i'm the chief of staff for the Joint Task Force Red Hills. So I work for Admiral Wade. And so what I'd like to do today, just very humbly, thank you for allowing us to be here to present this. Really two things I want to talk about today is just in brief, go over our mission and then give you an update on our timeline and be able to answer any questions on that. But you should see the Mission and End State slide up here. Some of you have seen this before, but just as a way to give us context, in March of 2022, based on the November 2021 spill, after a thorough review, the SECDEF made a decision to permanently close and defuel the Red Hill Boat Fuel Storage Facility. This was the right thing to do for the people of Hawaii, for military mission, the SECDEF then made the decision to move defuel from the Navy into the operational chain of command. And this was the catalyst for the joint task force. So we directly work for U.S. Indo-PACOM and the Secretary of FED. So it's in those operational channels. So with that, as you look at this really two-part we were directed to one safely and expeditiously defuel the facility part of that mission also was to rebuild trust with the community the state of the hawaii and you know to be transparent on our activities. So, and that's very important. And really the end state of all this is to set the conditions so that the facility can be closed. And many of you have heard Admiral Wade speak, but we really, this must be be a deliberate methodical operation so that we ensure the safety of all involved. And so that is the mandate and that's what we've been given by the SecDef and what we're executing every day. Next slide, please. As far as, and so this next chart, it, there's a lot of information here. So this, this is what we're calling our executive summary of anueling in February 24 with the completion of June of health and the environmental protection agency and osd to support a conditions-based earlier defueling start date this effort is tied to ongoing risk analysis where we're looking at specific conditions that have to be set to support moving forward and we're doing a monthly risk assessment of this with the entire team to make sure we're on track and mitigations are in place um and or being worked so we can buy back that risk so that i think that's very important so this is currently um the plan as we have briefed but again we are aggressively working to to move this timeline and as admiral would like to say balance safety and speed so what what you are looking at here um if you see on the top i just discussed that but you know on the left side these represent um internal stakeholders or lines of effort, if you will, along with regulators on key milestones that we need to meet to get to the defuel start. And so, for example, you may have heard in the press that we just started a dewatering evolution where we are removing water that is, you know, condensation that's built up in the tanks to make sure, you know, that is out there to prevent corrosion, et cetera. And, you know, this is a big milestone for us because one, you know, we're operating the valves and moving that. And so in general, those milestones just show that, you know, as we get through that, we're developing response plans to these milestones, which incorporates a training plan, a quality assurance portion of that, you know, the main operations that are going on. The next big milestone we have is the repacking of the lines to start into the defueling timeline. We have the National Environmental Policy Act that we're working through. And of course, the work that we do daily, weekly, monthly with the regulators to make sure we're on track for that. So this is just, as part as we move forward, we're trying to make sure this is out there and that everyone can track what is going on. The only couple of caveats I'll have this and then I'll turn this over. You know, currently we have worked with our partners to create a dashboard, which shows our in progress that is out on our website. So just give you an example. So you look up there, you see the repairs and maintenance, you know, as of April 12th, we were at 172 of 253 repairs that we had completed. So what we're trying to do is make sure we're accomplished those missions safely, but we're also trying to make sure we're putting this out into the space and as part of that, you know we're currently scheduled to have an open house on defueling, and this is May 23 and 24. Just so we can if anyone has more questions we can provide that information in detail to the public and stakeholders on that. So, ma'am, pending your questions, I could jump bottom of that slide, please? Yeah. So, I mean, just for everyone, this is the current plan, but it is subject to a lot of decisions to be made. So I know before we had that. So really what we just want to do, we're trying to share this, but also as we go out and about, just for everyone everyone because we want to protect our decision makers both of the regulators that um once we finalize our nipa and the environmental assessment then we'll be able to be hey this is the actual what we are going to do sorry for that clarification i'm sure a lot of people noticed that. So we'll take questions after the entire session. Whatever you think is right. Good morning, Commissioners, Chairwoman. It's a pleasure to be here. My name is Sarah Moody. I work for Naval Facilities Engineering Command Hawaii, specifically on the Red Hill Environmental Team that was stood up in response to the events that happened in November of 2021, impacting the drinking water system. And we have been tasked with a specific mission of the recovery and remediation of our aquifer and the water sources in Hawaii and specifically the drinking water system that serves Joint Base Hawaii. So today, I'm going to provide an overview based on next slide please based on our remediation schedule. This is a new tool that we have recently developed and posted on our Safe Waters website which is can be easily googled or it's at jbphh-safewaters.org. And this is posted so that the community and the public can be updated on some of the specific efforts that we're working on to recover and remediate the aquifer and to really pursue environmental actions following the events of the fuel spill in November of 2021. So I'll just give a few updates based on the details listed here. You can kind of look and read some of the specifics, but I'll just give a few updates based on the details listed here. You can kind of look and read some of the specifics, but I'll just give the overview. So we continue to operate shaft operations at the Red Hill Shaft. We are pumping into the Halava stream to maintain that capture zone and to prevent any migration of contamination in the aquifer. We have successfully begun the GAC flow optimization plan and on April 7th we lowered the pumping rate to an average of 3 million gallons per day with the goal of being able to lower the pumping rate down as low as possible but still be able to indicate that we're doing the best that we can to protect the aquifer. So that program has begun with the end goal of 1.8 million gallons per day. So while that doesn't completely end the pumping into the Alava stream, it does preserve some of the resources that we have here in Hawaii in our water and reduce that while still protecting the environment. We also continue to run skimming operations and capture at the top of the shaft itself. So we just replaced the skimmer at the top of the Red Hill shaft for the purpose of collecting any more product or a fuel product that may be remaining on the water table. And so we have actually not been collecting very much fuel product. It has gotten down to just a teaspoon to a tablespoon a month of what's left in the shaft the water looks fairly clear when you're down in the well but we wanted to increase that uh that collection by creating a system where it collects water allows it to pool a little bit and then skims to increase what we may be able to to collect from the red hill shaft we continue to have absorbance and booms and things of that nature to prevent any contamination from going through the gac units for the purpose of making sure that that media stays fresh and we continue to protect the environment in addition to that we have done more recovery efforts at the added three tunnels we continue to drill looking for locations where we may have hot spots or indication of fuel we have currently a a deep soil vapor monitoring port going in where we will look for any evidence of fuel in the strata below added three and then that will give us the the information that we need to pursue the specific areas of remediation to remove fuel where possible that's one of our primary missions is to identify where fuel is located and remove it when possible and so we continue to pursue those efforts through some pilot studies things such as soil vapor extraction where we will push air through to try to loosen any fuel product and remove it as well as efforts to look at what's potentially happening in the in the natural attenuation of any product in the ground so we also have monitoring well efforts we currently have uh in existence before this this started we had 21 monitoring walls in place and so we committed as the navy to install 22 additional monitoring wells for the purpose of identifying if any plume existed in the aquifer and also to create a warning or early detection of any migration of contamination to drinking water sources in the area so of those 22 wells we have successfully installed nine of them several of them have begun to produce data for us and have been added to our monitoring schedule and we also have four currently in progress we continue to work actions with um dNR, with UL, with city county, as well as with private landowners to look for locations that will give us viable information to give us knowledge of exactly what's happening in the aquifer and what's going on with the geophysical below in the ground. And so we continue that effort. And as a part of that monitoring effort, we collect samples from each of those locations on a weekly basis and that data is collected and provided and also posted to our Safe Waters website. In addition to our monitoring efforts, we've been using that information to feed modeling efforts. So we've been working two different groundwater modeling efforts. One of those is Navy led specifically with our contractor working with the Department of Health and the EPA and other agencies to try to be able to show exactly what's happening with the groundwater, how the water flows, any potential contamination, transportation, if an event were to happen. Also in conjunction to that concurrently the University of Hawaii has their own groundwater modeling effort overseen by Dr. Don Thomas, and he is working to create a concurrent model that will also inform the aquifer in the groundwater, and we're in full support of that effort we have given Dr. Thomas full access to all data. They're gonna be given access to monitoring wells as needed for research and things of that nature, and to conduct a tracer study to be able to identify an advance of defueling, ideally exactly what would happen if a contaminant were to enter the aquifer. And in addition to those efforts, we continue to be mindful of the defueling efforts that are approaching. So looking at how we can protect the groundwater, what we can do to plan in advance for spills, what we can do to create triggers and action levels of what we would need to take action on if anything were to happen, and to know exactly what are the levels that we're looking for in the groundwater as we monitor and look at all of the data coming in so in addition to all of these efforts that we do to recover and remediate the aquifer in the groundwater we also are overseeing the drinking water system so we have long-term monitoring that is ongoing it's not on this schedule but it is uh it is the program that was set in place in march of 2022 for the purpose of ensuring that the water remains safe to drink and so we have collected 4 900 out of 7 800 samples to date in period 5 of this program and the water continues to so that it meets safe drinking standards so we're able to continue to validate that process as well as we have efforts to look at where we can increase water that the Navy has access to. So the Navy IEA Halawa Shaft is one of our drinking water locations that has been offline since December 3 of 2021. And so we've been looking at ways that we could display that that water quality meets safe drinking water standards and could be an appropriate option if we needed an that that water quality meets safe drinking water standards and and could be an appropriate option if we needed an extra drinking water source so we have submitted a request to the department of health to uh consider or at least give us the conditions for which we would get to use that source in an emergency so that we could have that done in advance of any type of situation where we say had another water main break or another situation happen that impacted our drinking water. So beyond that, that is all I have for today, unless there are any questions. If I could jump in again, Chair Chang. Again, this is a matter of fine print, I suppose. So there it is, the fine print at the bottom, and to link it to exactly what Kevin said about what was at the bottom of his slide. Things can change. So as this becomes a matter of the commission's record, we want to ensure that people understand that this is subject to change. So it might come out and then there's, you know, without another kind of date stamp on there, except that red dotted vertical line, or, you know, Kevin's statement about, you know, wanting to preserve decision space. I suppose a way of saying that is that, you know, it's accurate as of today. And so just wanted to make that clear. Thank you. Appreciate the disclaimer. Great, thank you. Aloha Chairman Chang and the Commission. I appreciate the opportunity. Dr. Hove, it's great to see you to speak today. I'm going to cover closure, for Hilltown closure. We have the slide up here that we've been broadcasting and advertising on behalf of the Department of Navy associated with meeting the executive order from the Secretary of Defense to close those tanks. As Major General Hashimoto said earlier, stated there is a partnership between a lot of entities within the Department of Defense and then even outside of that within the federal government and within the state of Hawaii, and not to forget the community writ large, that's equally impacted. But as we move in, so this is kind of the advertising slide that we leverage most aptly. So while the JTF has defueling the Navy has responsibility for tank closure plan tank closure plans were initially released on november 1st of 2022 and understanding that this is an iterative plan and will be updated and modified as we move through conversations with the community the state the department of defense as well as the federal government that's to include the epa um In that tank closure plan, we have four options that we proposed. One of those was to close in place and render inoperable and for non-use for hazardous substance in the future, but that's a closure in place. The next one was closure in place, but for beneficial reuse. And I'll speak to that here in a minute. And that was requested by DOH to look at those options. We have the next one would be, we're gonna close and fill with an inert material or some sort of material that renders it an additional level of inoperability. And then the final one would be close and remove the steel liner and of the structures that exist in there today and then fill those voids backfill the navy has recommended option one to close in place and executing this plan is roughly three years and a lot of that stuff breaks down into the fact that uh where we are today concurrently working through uh decision-making processes uh involving the stakeholders and partners uh and leadership but then really looking at uh cleaning and really rendering safe so that does take time. So, but the option that we did propose just for everyone's informational purposes was, this we deemed was the least impactful to the environment. It was least impactful to the surrounding community. I would say not the easiest, it's the safest methodology by which we can close and render the tanks inoperable. And the fill option would be as I add that one, and I spoke about that with number 4, depending on what we decide. It almost it's relative to the trucks and the impact of the community and stuff, and why we kind of didn't go down that path was looking at these other options up front was we also could see speed and safety and but least environmental impact and so then you start talking trucks and other material removal. It just becomes a longer duration closure plan has four phases and currently we're executing phase one and two in parallel one and twos planning for permanent tank closure. Number two, right now we're working with the contractor and community as that will leverage community feedback as well as state and federal government on on what our potential reuse options, even as of gosh last week, I went to a small business and contracting with Meet the Primes downtown. Major General Hashimoto was there. And even word is out relative to the opportunity to look at reuse and look at feedback on methodologies for future remediationiation closure and safety associated with the environment so even in a forum like that i'm still running into people that are coming to communicate to me about opportunities i'm very careful though when i talk to them to say hey there's a there's a methodology by which we can go through this so that we properly vet and it doesn't become uh personal conjecture but there's a lot of really good ideas out there. So right now, the request by DOH was back in July, to look at the beneficial the non fuel reuse. And we awarded a contract to a local want native wine firm Nakapuna, that was done in the end of January. So we're working with them right now so that their survey will be released to the public and then the public will have an opportunity to go into that survey, provide that feedback. They'll gather that, we'll pull that report together. And then we look somewhere between early fall, no later than November, having that report back within DOH and the community so that we can provide feedback and make an informed decision if that's the right way to go. And when you're looking at some of those things, you know, we're looking at, you know, environmental input, utilities requirements, economic benefit, long term maintenance, engineering requirements, there's a whole host of issues that go into that. And that is not just an easy decision. There's a lot of good ideas that all make sense. But we've got to look at a lot of different factors that might either impact the federal government, the state, the communities, and then just long standing long term relationships relative to the importance of closing but upon receiving that we'll make sure that we work with the respective stakeholders and partners and primarily doh epa um phase three and four the tank closure plan um in preparation so phases three and four excuse me as the jtf already spoke they're going to be moving through they're in that process right now they're in that process of preparation for the tank closure, as in they prepare, they move through those repairs, and as they move through those repairs, they'll continue to work with the Navy, we already have working groups on a couple of different levels, and one of them has really transitioned from the JTF at the point at which they've completed their mission, but that trans transitions back into the Navy is the executive agent Apple Barnett of the region, and then making the conditions set by which we work with regulators and that we've we've got the right plans in place for prevention and response and then as we begin to uh repack the fuel repairs complete nothing else left that we have set conditions by which we can start to move forward with tank cleaning in the process um finally what i'd like to say in a couple other comments um is that uh there's 20 tanks up there uh there's 14 that are full of fuel right now what we need to make certain is that when we do those repairs when we repack the lines when we defuel those those are the 14 we're going to have to make sure we clean in that process that takes time there's four tanks uh that were recently cleaned. They will not be leveraged at this time. Again, a little bit out of my lane, but there's no plans for any fuel associated with those because they're clean and clear. And then we have two that have always been out of commission for the last 15 years, tank 19 and 20. So as we've submitted our supplement number one, we have, and we just talked about the closure options. Supplement two, to the tank closure plan will follow. That'll be in on or about in May. And in that one, what you'll end up receiving is additional information on updating the tank closure plan relative to one. There's feedback that we owe the EPA and DOH that will incorporate relative to their request for information that we'll put in there. And then we're going to be looking at the structural analysis. There was another third party report that we looked at as far as that informs between those different options, making certain that when fuels out, or if we go with one that the steel structures are safe, break, we go with four, option four, which was remove that we understand potential impacts and risks there. And so that'll help inform our plan as we continue to move forward. Much like the major general stated earlier, iterative process, decisions need to be made, as we work with one another and continue decisions need to be made, you know, as we work with one another and continue to try to be as transparent as possible. It's through these forms that allow us that opportunity. And so I welcome that and I thank you all very much. So mahalo for this opportunity. Thank you, ma'am. Thank you very much. Now, I know you're, could you just introduce yourself? I think we've met. I did not do that. Yes, ma'am. I'm sorry. And I know that the general told me to. My name is Captain Cameron Gertzma. I'm the commanding officer for Naval Facilities Engineering Systems Command Hawaii. But that's the NAVFAC side of the house. Then there's also the Commander Navy Region, who I'm representing today, Admiral Barnett, as his staff civil engineer. Very good. Yes, ma'am. Thank you. Thank you. Aloha. Good morning, Madam Chair, commissioners, deputy. My name is Kevin Nakamura. I'm the chief medical officer for the Defense Health Agency Region Indo-Pacific. I know that's a mouthful, but sometimes it's called the DHRIP. And we are the lead agency responsible for healthcare for individuals and families that were impacted by the Red Hill JP5 fuel contamination incident. You may be familiar that back in the early January, we started the Red Hill Clinic to take care of our military service members and military beneficiaries. Last week, eligibility was expanded for the first time to include civilians, so non-military beneficiaries. And this was through a program called Secretarial Designation Authority. And we are very excited to be able to offer our healthcare services now to impacted members of the general public. The eligibility criteria are listed in the Secretarial Designation Memo, but they're pretty straightforward. So if you had permanent residents in the house that was served by the Navy Water Distribution Line, or you had full or part-time employment in a DOD facility on the Navy Water Distribution Line during the dates of 20 November 2021 through 18 march 2022 and you have symptoms that may have started or gotten worse after water contamination exposure then you're eligible for care in the red hill clinic red hill clinic itself is planned by primary care clinicians that are privileged to see patients of all ages we also have nurse case managers medical technicians on site and the clinic operation hours have recently expanded to now five days a week from 8 a.m to 5 p.m making an appointment is very easy you call the 24 7 tricare nurse advice line and that number is easy to remember because it's just 1-800 tricare so t-r-i c-a-r-e once you're connected to the line you press option one follow some voice prompts and then you're connected to a care coordinator that press option one, follow some voice prompts, and then you're connected to a care coordinator that can help you go through appointment. So on behalf of DHA, I just wanna thank everyone for your time and attention today. We are proud to be a part of this community and we are looking forward to welcome Secretary of Physically patients to the Red Hill Clinic. Wow. Thank you very much. Okay, ready for questions? Yes, ma'am. Okay, I am going to now open it up to the commissioners. If you have any questions or comments, I see Neil. Yes, thank you, Chair, and I can't see the my zoom the faces of the presenters too well, but I want to thank each and every one of you for your presentation this was the best presentation we've in my experience we've had on this issue i'm what i'm hearing are are four fundamental commitments uh one is to mitigate remediate uh the the contamination that's in that aquifer that's taken all that entire system offline for us. Number two, to defuel the tanks to eliminate future risks. Number three, to develop a community accepted plan for how to repurpose those tanks. And four, to take care of the citizens who have been affected by this. Now, that last issue is kind of we have great empathy for not a whole lot of jurisdiction over uh but it's good to hear your plans on the first three those really affect what we one third of of what we do um as a as a the water commission and i want to come to the other two issues uh later but it's really important for the first one is how long will that system be offline? And how long it's offline depends on the past contamination as well as future risks. And what I see in this for the first time is kind of a comprehensive plan for how you're going to deal with that. And if I'm reading it correctly, I see that the fuel the the tanks will be defueled by june 23rd uh uh june of 2024. is that did i hear that read that correctly yes sir yes sir okay i didn't see an end date for the remediation and that's somewhat understandable but will we be working toward an end date for when you anticipate and and to the to the the continuing reminders that the caveat below that things can change of course they can't you know that's why you do that's why you set out a plan and you have variance reporting and what but do we have an idea yet as to when the uh the contamination will be remediated and we can bring these systems back online and drink that water? Sir, I'll answer that question. So environmental remediation doesn't have a clear timeline at this time. One of the key markers is going to have to be that we defuel the tanks and complete a comprehensive site assessment of the facility to be able to identify exactly where we have contamination, not only from the events that happened in November of 2021, but also look for any potential contamination from any other things that have happened at Red Hill over the last 80 years. In addition to that, though, we are pursuing a water treatment plant for the Red Hill shaft that is dependent on regulatory approval to be approved as a drinking water source however it is one of our mitigation strategies to pursue usage of that water again but understanding that we need to have extra contingency protections in place for our community and for the drinking water system so that project is underway with a temporary project in place with a goal of 2025 and a permanent project in place in 2027. so those those efforts would not be pursued until after the tanks are defueled and the primary risk of contamination is removed from the hill so as of right now those are kind of the efforts that we're pursuing for those that that specific shaft for the navy aya halaba shaft uh we would pursue that on a more sooner term just because we haven't seen direct contamination of that source so as of right now we are pursuing an emergency status but we're also looking at treatment options on a contingency basis just to create a protection measure for the community what i take from that is that this system which supplies 25 of the drinking water for uh oahu will be offline at least until 2027. there is potential in 2025 to have a temporary system stood up in place while the long-term system is being built but that is dependent on regulatory approval so thank you uh and just to get to just get the last one so the tank repurposing that decision would be made next month with the doh's approval did i read that correctly? No, no, Commissioner, this is Captain Ertzema. No, so what we're doing right now is that we don't know, we're working with DOH. Ideally, when we submit additional information to continue to move that decision-making process forward in that supplement number two, it allows DOH and the regulators to make an informed decision in partnership with us. So I would say eminent, but I don't want to speak for DOH is what I would say on that, because what we know we're going with option one until we see or told there's another methodology by which we need to execute i because we have to make a decision to move out so that we at least do not lose momentum uh but understanding that option one uh is is at least um will support and informs moving into any one of the other options if that needs to change so as soon as you determine that option then you create a plan as you have with the other two uh with remediation and defueling that really sets up milestones to completion and from our standpoint that's what we want to see at each meeting when you come in before with a briefing here's your plan to the targeted outcomes, and here's your progress or your lack of progress or your setbacks in meeting those milestones. That's a productive use of our time and really helps us track this to closure. So I really appreciate that we're finally getting here because so often we've had people just talk about activity without relationship to kind of a clear goal or outcome. And this is a great improvement. And I'll just say this last thing, Chair. So this, as I understand it, is one third of our issue here. How long will this part of the cyst are or a waffle based system be offline the second thing we have to to continue to to look at it's not the navy's uh job to do this it's our staff's job is what pressures are upon our ex our others uh parts of the system that are now meeting the demand that was once met by this part the halawa and red hill aquifer you know how are they doing in terms of meeting existing uh allocations as well as future demand you know because if they're not if they're stressed if we're pushing beyond the point of sustainable yields then we've got to think about conservation measures and some and scrolling back some of those commitments and the third dimension is what does this tell us about the need to have new sources developed. That don't utilize a soccer for that's going to be offline at least till 2025 and possibly beyond that so to me those those as and correct me if i'm wrong chair Chair or Kaleo, those are our three key issues in this. And now we are finally getting a clear plan to track and monitor, you know, for the first part of that issue. Kaleo, did you want to comment? I'll quickly react and then I, we have staff online break that are lead on this but um yeah we know working on understanding the whole system and our aquifers as a whole as the navy is one of the many users in this area is really important another thing from a regulatory standpoint right making sure we're managing everyone's uses in addition to the Navy is another. And again, it all ties into this whole data conversation that we just had, right? And that we need everyone to help support the commission in its regulatory role by providing timely and accurate data so we can do that analysis and make recommendations for the commission to consider so um yeah all of those are very important and and i think you kind of framed well what what are some of our priorities there are there are others that we have to consider but in general those those are in alignment i don't know if ryan wanted to add anything from his perspective as the head of our groundwater program um no i don't really have anything to add except that we want to try to stay on top of any plans to maybe open up some sources in emergency situations and so we're um actively as kaleo was saying um you know reporting is important um the second component of that is for us to actively monitor the data that comes from reporting to understand what are going to be the potential environmental impacts attributed to turning sources on or shifting sources elsewhere yeah thank you and neil this is i would just say that we are really we are also as a matter of coordination trying to work closer with board of water supply and doing a more you know kind of a collaborative engagement with them so that through the good data we are better able to make better decisions there's currently also through the legislature there's some bills in process that may give us some additional tools to better manage and regulate the system so i think appreciate you know the comment and rest assured i think we are you, including the governor's office, is really looking at this in a very comprehensive way, trying to build and recognizing that the Navy has got to be a partner with us through the good data to help us make better decisions. But thank you for that. Well, this is excellent. How often will we be tracking this? Is this a monthly, now, very that comes to us? We get a little bit. It doesn't have to be long. It just said there or it could be two months. I don't know what it is, but that's my question. How often will we track? Can we anticipate tracking the progress against the milestones? I think, Neil, I don't think we're going to have the Indo-PACOM, the Navy, come to us on a monthly basis. We may, as an alternative, have them provide us written updates, if that's possible. But I think that this was a really good, I think my desire was to create a platform to get good information, to give us some baseline, get us to know the Navy, but it's really to provide the Navy an opportunity to give us good, accurate, current information. And we will work on how do we provide a commission, more regular updates. It may not be in-person person presentations but it may be written presentations but my top of the head suggestion is at least quarterly that they come before us to have a report and unless there's a significant variance and if there's a significant variance that we ought to know about then whenever it happens they they come to us okay good question i see the navy shaking their head so i have got um aurora i think i saw your hand up next and then i i'm sorry can i just jump in to address commissioner hannis's um concerns so um what i can do is through some of the remediation roundtable meetings and other meetings that we've had with the Navy, there are a lot of opportunities for community engagement through meetings outside of ours. So what I can do is forward to all the commissioners chair, the schedule for those outreach opportunities. That way, I think you guys, maybe the navy doesn't have to address things specific to remediation or closure directly to the commission but you guys can see those updates on a more regular basis than the commission meetings I think certainly with respect to the allocations and the things that the that the commission um are directly responsible for we can request updates as those are necessary thanks thank you aurora and then i've got mike after that um thanks commissioner hannes i agree this is is really helpful to see kind of the synoptic view of the plans. Those written plans are very dense and hard and inaccessible. So the the infographics are helpful. I have a suggestion for the staff. I mean, I think it would help we were hearing from the navy or an organizations represented sort of in that group to hear in tandem with our staff our groundwater staff on what they're measuring what you know what because you guys Ryan I mean we're we have data from again all the users so if we can hear either in alternating months or next to each other like okay we have this usage we have these changing usages this is our status oh by the way the next three each other like okay we have this usage we have these changing usages this is our status oh by the way the next three months look like they're going to be dry we can make more sort of have a more informed view of the status of our waimalu moanalua you know pro harbour aquifer sector area so um if that's possible and if the um the open public meetings can not just be forwarded to us, but maybe if they're public, if they're really public, if they can be shared also on the Commission Red Hill page so that the public can access it. So I have questions for Navy representatives and mostly to help me understand your infographics. The first was, I apologize, I didn't catch the name of the first speaker, if it was General Hashimoto or Captain Gerritsma, but that first diagram with the Gantt chart, it looked like there were, in general, like three or four words that were repeated. And there was dewatering, which you explained as removing moisture related to corrosion and then there was repacking and then there was sort of a large undefined window called unforeseen repairs and maintenance before defueling and then final unpacking can you just explain those terms in lay terminology yeah so ma'am first of all Colonel colonel kevin williams i'm a u.s army officer i'm part of the joint task force just and this is part of the command and control operational command and control um so yeah so so ma'am the i i explained the dewatering and that was you know simply just removing uh built up condensation from the tanks, which helps and prevent corrosion, right? So make sure we're checking to make sure that, you know, the quality of the tank and the pipes, we get the water out of there before we defuel. The repacking of the lines, the repacking of the lines before we can go to defuel and do the gravity fed, right, to let gravity drain them out, we will now have to reintroduce fuel into the lines to stabilize the equilibrium there. That's probably the simplest way to say it. So we don't put additional pressure. It's one continuous system. And that evolution allows us then to repack the lines. Now we can perform our checks, our rehearsals on that in preparation for the defuel start. And that's kind of how that works. And it's also a chance to, you know, again, because of the emergency order, since unpacking, during unpacking in October, we did, you know, move the valves that hadn't been moved since the spill this is just another check to allow us to to make sure those systems are good and then we allowed for that window during that period you see the unforeseen repairs and maintenance as we do that repacking evolution is just to make sure we can go over that with a fine tooth comb to make sure all conditions are set, not only from a repairs, but the response drills we need to do and partnership with the regulators to make sure all the training is complete, to make sure all the people that we have to do this are locked in, are certified and ready to go. So that's hopefully that helps describe that. And then as you get to the other milestones, you'll see there's, you know, the tank bottom procedure review. And that is really so once we drain the main tanks, there is at the tank bottom, and we have infographics and I can send this to the commission, but it's the draining of the fuel remaining that is not at the pipe that actually drains into the main line. So we just, we make sure we get that out. So that's another evolution. So if you can imagine, these are a series of different iterations that are using the same system, but different procedures. So we just want to make sure every time we do it in conjunction with the regulators, we're looking at lessons learned. We're making sure our safety criteria and our response is set and then we do it again um and you know like you described for further updates you know as we're drilling down with regulators because this this executive summary right it's built on a master schedule uh with the critical path we'll make sure we're uh showing some of these evolutions right and so if you can imagine for every one of those milestones, and I know there's a lot on here, but we can simplify. There's about nine major milestones. We're doing concepts of the operations, rehearsals, and that's what all that left column shows you, right? The interdependencies that we're making sure we're applying the rigor and the safety to do this correct. Ma'am, hopefully that answers your question no that that that does help and it's my understanding that there's tremendous pressure right from these tall tanks that is part of the safety issues and that moving fuel is risky business is that kind of well yes ma'am so you know that is part of what the repairs, right? The repairs that we're doing is to make sure that the integrity of the system is ready for the defueling evolution, right? And so that's where our repair directed and working with the regulators and through a third quality validation, we're making sure that's good. But we just want to be very deliberate in our approach. Right. And so even the dewatering right now, this is good for us because we are going through our response plan, making sure everything is set. So we are doing this safely. And, you know, and that is why using the gravity fed we're just once we repack the lines we want to check everything to make sure it's ready to go, and then we can move to the next step so very deliberate, we're trying to move fast but we're trying to move safe as well. Thank you. I I have heard significant concern that that window of unforeseen repair and maintenance could be a point at which the defueling plan might change course due to national security and i'm not gonna say that I I mean it do you have any comments about that. and then the other I guess statement I wanted to make is, I think, you know, taking the time to explain some of the jargon right here is part of. I think. Yeah, I appreciate that because it is part of establishing some better transparency and dialogue but but there is I have heard significant concern that, oh well this long drawn out timeline, maybe, you know, maybe it's going to, these plants are just going to go poof and smoke at some point. I know that, nice to see you again, Mark Hashimoto here. So what I can, I can tell you what I've heard people with more stars than me say uh we are absolutely committed to the secretary of defense's decision on march 7th to defuel and permanently close the red hill facility that that that is the only decision that's out there and that is what we are moving toward uh every single day. Thanks. Thank you. I have one more question for NAVFAC's Sarah Moody, but maybe if any other commissioners had. Go ahead, Auroa, why don't you just finish your question. So thank you, Sarah, for describing all the detailed activities. I'm a little bit confused because of that diagram. I see a lot of monitoring and investigation. And then you mentioned that remediation, any actual remediation would follow the defueling, but the slide you had was called remediation. So can you explain like why it's called remediation when to me it's just monitoring and I am I I'm a little bit frustrated that there isn't kind of even discussion of what you're gonna do besides measure. Sorry i'll add some clarity. So we are actively pursuing remediation at Addit 3, where the November 2021 spill took place. And that is ongoing. We have in previous reports, done excavation outside Addit 3 where a leach tank overflowed removing, you know, 25 feet depth of soil totaling about 400 gallons of fuel we are putting in deep soil vapor monitoring ports that are going to be utilized for a pilot to be able to use air to reduce any fuel that may be caught in the underground to remove it we continue to skim and remove fuel from the aquifer as possible all of that is still ongoing i think my statement about long-term remediation for the bigger picture of red hill is that our current mission is very specifically to add it three that the events that occurred at the red hill shaft but there is a bigger picture of environmental care and remediation that needs to occur following the closure of the red hill facility and that we need to look at it from a holistic standpoint of the entire facility and any other potential events that would have occurred and and we need the fuel out of the hill to be able to do that properly and effectively so it remediation is ongoing and that is why there are no in dates on my on my schedule because we will continue to pursue this until uh everyone collectively agrees that that you know we've been successful, so we are doing activities to remediate the monitoring is the ongoing as a protection measure, and those are. Those are occurring concurrently. So, can you confirm that there's still free product coming into the shaft, but you mentioned it's about a tablespoon per month? Yes. So usually we only see a sheen or free product after a large rain event. And when we do so, we're able to collect it with the skimmers and the booms in the shaft. And it's an average of a teaspoon to a tablespoon a month right now. What do we know about transport of safe dissolved contaminants beyond the Navy sentinel wells and immediate proximity? And you mentioned the 20, the additional nine, but as someone smart told me, the horse is out out of barn so what do we know about um i guess so the goal so the original goal of adding those 22 monitoring wells was to be able to a create a plume delineation so that we could clearly through monitoring be able to identify where the contamination had moved and then to B, put them on the outskirts of Red Hill to be able to either A, tell us if there had been a large transfer or B, indicate if any contamination was moving to those locations. So, so far the results that we're getting from those P wells or plume delineation wells are showing that we don't have a lot of contamination outside of the immediate area of Red Hill. It just, it's not, the results aren't indicating. All of our heat maps are showing that it's contracted down to the area directly below the tanks from historical spill since 2014. And then right around the Red Hill shaft where we continue to do operations. So the purpose of those is to tell us exactly where any transport of contamination has occurred and all we can do is continue to gather that weekly data to give us definitive answers on not only any fuel product but any content any analytes that are related to the byproducts or the breakdown of fuel so we're looking at it from a comprehensive standpoint of not just current free-flowing fuel, but if there's any byproducts of the breakdown of fuel. And that's also the efforts of the modeling of what they're trying to do is to be able to create a model to identify where any contaminant may go if an event were to occur or predict potentially where any contaminants went from the events that occurred in 2021. okay so there was a 2022 i think february 2022 heat map that uh looked like there was a plume that then quickly dissipated is there a current interpretation on your end was it just advected away or was that natural attenuation is their understanding of that because that that heat map really lit up in 2022 and if you're not picking up anymore where did it go a lot of it was removed directly from the red hill shaft i mean the continuous pumping of the gax of the red hill shaft allowed us to get free product off the top of the shaft and and allowed us to you know remove as much as possible i think there is a level of natural attenuation and if you speak with experts they will say that that's occurring and and you know it's happening in the strata so we do hope to eventually pursue uh studies that will give us more definitive information on natural attenuation this is hey doctor this is captain birds. I also want to add to that. So number one on the data, I wouldn't say there was a perfect partnership relative to the data that was released with that. So when you look at the monitoring wells, that was, those were TPH hits and spikes, not free flowing product. So what that demonstrates is that there's a presence. It doesn't necessarily mean that it's thousands or hundreds of gallons. It's just it's it's it's snipping if you will. So it's and that was based on a certain data point in time with the most extreme in time that was translated over months, but kept to the extreme. So when it was low, it went to the most extreme. And now where we are today is that we are not seeing the TPH hits like that we saw in the most extreme scenario. When we talk about recovery, I think you're right. And I wanna get back to that remediation and recovery. Yeah, until state EPA, community, right, every last drop is our goal. What we are looking at is the science between, you know, how do you define natural attenuation? How do you watch transport? And how do you model and reconcile kind of the differences across the science world with the experts on what are the facts and assumptions that would go into a model what i would say though in the transport model and in our ability to work with u of h and doh uh and frankly any any of the other partners because we do meet weekly if not monthly um to try to reconcile where those nuances are and how we get to a point where we can make decisions my last point i have to make this and i appreciate it um because i've kind of been watching this since almost day one is that data this was great i appreciate the doctor's speech or his presentation earlier i thought it was fantastic uh data so when we have the plume delineation wells and the sentinel wells and uh to the commissioner's point on what's the impact to the system my ability to move through permitting outside of the red hill area proper such that we can partner and demonstrate that there is no transport or free product flowing so there's there's there needs to be that partnership and positive progress that allows us to continue to come together so we can make a risk-based decision on on on where that uh that challenge is going to be in the future. And so there's a lot of efforts going on the challenge to get back to the commissioner's question on Wednesday end date. That's driven by a lot of permitting and a lot of transparency and belief. After the decisions are made, and then break after that, when that allows us to move forward with some of those baby steps in the direction that the Secretary of Defense wanted us to close permanently close, then that allows us, and we'll start prior to a broader remediation. Because right now doing both at the same time, there are facets that we're looking at. But at the same time it won't be of the scale until we actually have the fuel out of there. Oh, thanks. Sorry one last question for Captain Gertzma. The closure plans are much appreciated. But you know the Navy, as i'm sure you're aware, does not have a good track record in Hawaii of stewardship. You just look at all the many places that most, as the least impactful environmental option, because there won't be trucks, it sort of is incongruous with the reality that many people still, you know, can't do ecological restoration in certain areas because of UXO or because of contamination. So what may be fast for the Navy to close the books on leaves a long legacy for Hawaii and residents. So I just want to maybe challenge you to think about there's what's maybe best in the short term. And then there's what makes sense for the rest of us in the long term. I know officers cycling and all, but we're here for generations beyond. So please consider really, really that DOH recommendation for how do we do beneficial non-fuel reuse. So comment rather than a question. Thank you. Thank you. um non-fuel reuse so comment rather than a question thank you um it is 11 20. i'm i've got um i've got michael and then wayne um do you want to take a break or just go for me i think you can just go okay then michael why don't you go ahead hey much i'll be short not to cover some of the great comments and i do echo commissioner hannah's this has been the best presentation you guys are now i think rock bottom we've definitely hit rock bottom you've organized yourself in a way with timetables and deliverables that we can begin to isolate the issue i want to thank you for start starting to reduce the amount of uh aquifer water you're putting in halaba stream and i appreciate that going on i also um focusing on the long-term remediation and chair this is an an area that you might be And then, as you know, the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the be able to deal with the plume contamination and the spread. So that might be something that both DOH and DLNR can work with the private landowners. I think the Navy has said they're ready, they have resources, they're willing to put the wells in. But until we get those monitoring wells in, we're going to have a tough time beginning to establish the type of science we need to be able to understand how we can open up the aquifer again i think from a planning perspective it's quite obvious that it's going to be at least one year to maybe three years before we're going to have that type of science that that we feel capable of opening up the aquifer again. And then finally, just to remind the Navy, the Water Commission is not an official regulator, but we have broad regulatory authority that we have not implemented to date. And I'm really glad to see the progress being made, you guys showing up at the EPA DOH meeting, and this meeting, it's been a really i think we're moving forward now but do not forget the water commission for instance your um your request for um uh emergency use of a lava chat didn't go to the commission just went department of health safe water we have a lot of issues on this aquifer besides your use of it so over pumping even in the short term of beyond your permitting allowance could well affect other issues that you guys are not aware of so just a reminder uh we're here we're attending the meetings we are not an official regulator but we have broad regulatory authority that we have with the permits and permit modification. So and again, but I do want to echo this has been the most positive in production presentation that you have provided us and we do appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you very much. Wade. Thank you, Chair. Thank you, General, Captain, Colonel, Sarah. Maybe this is for Sarah. Could you describe the organization that will be managing the water system long term? You know, there are a lot of improvements, enhancements, and measuring devices that will be installed within the next two years. What would that organization look like? And is that, how would that organization be able to capture and maintain institutional knowledge and it seems that you know that was one of the issues that we faced at this red hill problem and it's something that you don't have to answer today but i think you know you should look at with staff is that if you continue to pump three million gallons a day of 1.8 million gallons a day is there a better use of that water rather than putting it into the stream so if you could help me with the organizational structure going forward long term yes sir so when it comes to uh water for joint Joint Base Hawaii, it is a multifaceted integrated approach. The water system is owned by the Joint Base commander and is overseen by his public works officer from the technical infrastructure standpoint. Our team specifically supports those efforts from the monitoring water quality standpoint and environmental approach, specifically as it relates to the events that occurred at red hill and ensuring that the water system remains safe but the operations of our water system will remain with the joint base staff and the water teams that are in charge of those long term and we will continue to support those and maintain institutional knowledge by creating collaborative efforts amongst our team with those people that are permanently in charge of those systems. One of the primary reasons that our team was stood up was because this was such a large problem set. It was probably too big for the existing teams that have been in place. And so it kind of allowed us to come along and create some support to deal with this problem set while they continue to manage and oversee the drinking water system. But Sarah, with all the changes that are being instituted and implemented, is that the organization appropriate to manage this system moving forward? And if the turnover rate in that organization is every three or six years, how do you accumulate that institutional knowledge that you can be able to assess and react to any kind of abnormalities to the systems? Yes, Commissioner. So this is Captain Gertzma. So what I would say is this. Yeah, I would say this. I don't want to confuse the fuel systems operators with the water systems operators those were two different factions and organizations uh the the failure if you will in red hill was a fuel systems issue uh that resulted in that fuel being released into a wellhead that got into a system the people that are actually part of the joint-based public works department water systems operators have been there for some in some cases 40 years so those people are local they are native uh very and and so they're the ones that are not going anywhere short of, you know, our inability every 2 or 3 years to leave them effectively. So. but those are the people that remain and so what Navy, Department of Navy is really looking at how we, in concert even with DLA and DOD, is how we manage fuel across all locations globally. So that we are protecting the environment and the community and operating smartly. The second one is here locally as we're as we as the JTF completes their mission successfully, we will then transition back to kind of more of that Navy ownership potentially. But that doesn't change how we operate in permitting or in systems operations, other than I'll tell you, since I kind of own them, like they work for me and with me, I can always use more, right? Never enough. And because we've really taxed them. The event, unfortunate, but number two, more so those people are hard working individuals that have worked tirelessly for a year and a half now trying to get to the point to where we are. And so anyway, I appreciate the question, the opportunity to answer that. Well, I guess Captain, long term, you know, you have now 22 additional central wells, you have a lot more monitoring responsibilities is a present management organization, able to. here's what i would say um the answer is uh no but i would say at present we can maintain and we're able to do what we need to do what i've looked at in the future is working with the department of navy is in 24 and 25 is really looking for opportunities to increase the staff uh and that's been you know with the assistance not only from the op nav department 80 folks, but also when I have an opportunity to because this is important, and if we can get support in the location of those monitoring wells and then we communicate that out, that allows us to move forward with more speed and not uninformed, ill-informed speed, but allows us to shorten some of those timelines so that regulators can make those decisions with us. So thank you for the question. Well, one more question, question captain if you don't mind is there a risk and threat assessment to the aquifer being assembled or is that comprehended over the dod facilities specifically at red hill yes one of our missions is a site assessment. Overall for all the aquifers, all the DOD facilities, to put things in perspective. I think the Red Hill has been top of mind and clearly visible. But are there other sleeping dogs that we need to worry about? Yes. So again, Commissioner Haynes, I would tell you I'm very familiar in the role that I was in before. We looked at all the sites and all the facilities in the Indo-Pacific area. That went from far eastern Japan down to Guam, looked at Diego Garcia back to Hawaii, located on Kauai, as well as potential impacts. You know, again, what then what it becomes is it was an initial assessment. It was an initial assessment to look at risk and partnership with DLA, Defense Logistics Agency that owns the fuel and NAVSUP that runs those. Pull that together just to give us the quick conceptual understanding of where there's risk right then we also partnered that with uh looking at wellhead protection and looking at sanitary surveys and really looking at water systems and where those water systems uh were close or in proximity or could be impacted if we didn't run into that. Where that's gone, I don't know. Now I'm kind of near focused more specifically on Hawaii, but I do know that at least the department maybe with NAVFAC headquarters is really looking at that. Great. Yeah, that's key. Thank you very much, Captain. Yes, sir. I just wanted to um say that simply because the fuel the tanks are defueled doesn't excuse the military from their regulatory oversight of the department of health to bring safe drinking water to its customers. So it may require long-term monitoring. It may require, it is going to require remediation. There will be a lots of steps in between, but they will be under regulatory requirements for the aquifer. Thank you, Kathy. Let's see, Paul, did you wanna, do you have any questions or comments? No, thank you. Thank you, Kathy. Do you have any other comments? Okay. I just have two things. I really appreciated the presentation. Extremely helpful. The availability of the data, is that available? All of it. It's always been available. So that goes to DOH. Yeah, but. The department continues to ask the Navy for data that is readable and accessible. I mean, it's one thing to give us data, but it's another thing to be able to synthesize it and read it in a fashion that's quickly and able, that our people and border water supply is able to understand it, so. And then I think what's important, one is the data has, the availability and the data has improved and is demonstrated to the community, number one, and first and foremost, to protect the community. Number two, going back to Dr. Ho's statement, we just need to continue to work through that, right? That involves not, we kill them with the discovery and the data but at the same time there's someone on our side that's got to collect the data and so we got to get to a point where we understand, and we've been doing that, how we share it and what are we going to use that data for. We know, regulatory compliance, but we also submit those reports on a quarterly, monthly, annually, going all the way back to the original AOC that directed us to provide that. And so just as of this week, Dr. Ho, EPA, Region 9, Leadership ASN, Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Mr. Ho is online, kind of talking about where that governance, where that structure was so that we can continue to optimize and kind of get this right back to the regulatory compliance aspect and the governance associated with that, and then sharing that right data in the methodology but how we share it because going back to the other commissioners point resources are just the top, and we have received that feedback so some of the improvements that we're making is we have created an interactive map for drinking water which allows people to find their home click on their home see their results. the transparency and the public outreach component and it's a challenge this is scientific chemistry data that you're giving to a lay community that doesn't understand it at first glance so we want to make sure that it's available and posted but also that we're we're incorporating tools to help aid in understanding and increase public public understanding we just have this juxtaposed against dr longman's presentation which it was just i mean it was like i mean it was practical it was usable so so you may want to consider you know further contacting him my last point is more it's more of a comment and it's sort of the line of of aurora's comments about um you know the future i mean Kathy Ho and I, we were very privileged to be part of Kaho'olawe during the transfer. And I remember the commissioners, I was with the Deputy Attorney General's office and advising the Kaho'olawe Island Reserve Commission. And I do remember Auntie Frenchy, Emmett, many of the commissioners asking, Don should we take the island back? And I said as your lawyer, no. You're not going to have enough money and you're not going to have enough time. But as a Hawaiian, of course you have to take it because we will never get it back under any other circumstance. So this is probably General Hashimoto, and it is probably rhetorical, but I know the Secretary of Defense has made a commitment to close and remove. want you to think about will there become a point in time when usdod says we put as much technology and money as we can and this is as good as it's going to get and it may not be good enough but again this is totally above our pay grade that answer i don't know what that is we're still struggling with the whole lobby i mean no surface clearance no subsurface clearance people can't even you know it's not habitable but we took it back because that's as good as it's going to get so i i i know looming against all of this is that ultimate um what are we what are we eventually going to get back? And this is so much more critical from a just a public health and safety. But again, just bear in mind that that is sort of, for some of us, the elephant in the room. At some point in time will the department of defense say this is you know we've done all that we can no don't need to answer with that i know that we have members of the public here who want to provide comment i am going to take a break five minute break because my bladder cannot handle this much more. And so we're going to come back at 1145, five minutes. We're going to take public comments to finish this presentation. But again, I greatly appreciate your being here and answering the questions. And it's been extremely helpful. Thank you. it's been extremely helpful thank you are you guys going to do an ea you know like how on the defueling we it was just um sort of out of the blue came in that we had to they were going to do a a nipa document are they going to are you guys doing a nipa document for the um oh yeah the longer plan yeah well well particularly well particularly what i'm looking at is the um you know the the water treatment facility the water treatment plants and things like that yeah so i mean you gotta we're very early in that it's just yeah when the question is always are you never going to use the water again we are at least pursuing options understanding that you guys are going to have to improve whatever it goes so one of the things is you, the format of having everyone here, you know, it's got this stuff. You can't transfer. You've got to discharge it somewhere. Well, you can take the one you said, and sprinkle, but you've got to run it back up over the mountain on the other side. And even then, I don't have a really good time then when you look at it the longer term uh ea um or go back to the water treatment we want to stop the whole stream we all do it like no one go through something and we've got to be able to figure out what is approval that gets us to continue to reduce that and that they're in lines i think some of the challenges with that communication i mean yeah and then you, the, I know you guys are like far away from your, your water treatment facility, or your emergency water treatment. But I want you guys to also consider, and I know this, you know, I know my staff has already been talking to you guys. But what are we going to do with the spoils from that water treatment? I mean, what are you going to do with that? That's like, I mean mean right now we understand that we have to plan for it to go yeah because can you hear us this one's me do we need to meet these Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Oh, no, no, no, no, this is a different issue. All right. We're back on the record. So I am now going to take our comments from people that are on the zoom. I again will ask you to keep your comments to three minutes. They are not designed to be asking um the presenters any questions but to present it to the to the water commission so kaleo if you could read off the the name sure thank you uh first off is anne wright but i don't know if she writes written questions okay second catherine mcmahon and after c, if you can read off all the names. Hia Lanise Sonodapale will be third. Susan Popola Davis, four. Danny Escurito, five. And I'm not sure if there was another one, but I think that's it for now. Okay, so Catherine, go ahead. If you can unmute yourself. Yes, I can. Good morning, or good afternoon for some of you. My name's Catherine McClenahan. Can you hear me fine? Yes. I see. My family and I are civilians and we're affected by Red Hill leak and continue with still ongoing medical issues. I want to comment on the medical support to Red Hill families or lack thereof for civilians not all families living on the navy's water lines were military thousands of civilians were exposed and hundreds have left the island and now struggle to receive proper medical care on the mainland what i believe what i believe the dod has done so far in the last 17 months has been driven by fear of legal culpability and a defensive medical posture. While you first waited on surveys and now wait on studies that will take more than years, our families struggle. That posture has caused civilian families with symptoms to spend thousands of dollars tied the hands of well-intended doctors while families are physically and medically suffering and struggling in a variety of ways to include financial ruin, medical illness, and emotional heartache. Toxic exposures do not sicken everyone, but they are a reality. They are medically dangerous and result in both immediate and future illness for some people exposed. Bottom line, the Navy and DOD have not provided civilian families and civilian doctors the information or medical care necessary to properly address our symptoms and illness. For example, if not for the Hawaii Department of Health providing a memo in February of 2023, and I would like to thank Ms. Ho and your staff for that, a memo driven by families testifying at the Honolulu Board of Water Supply meeting, not by the DOD dod families would still be unable to provide doctors expert information on what chemicals and levels of our ongoing symptoms the dod had uh a free decided the history of 2022.D. report on the history of 2020 took place to include and consider that those in the military system would understand and receive those results and information. That information was crucial to families as we were struggling to recover from ongoing symptoms. The D.O.D. is repeating the story of Camp Lejeune. Congressional hearings in 2010, titled Lejeune, Looking Back, Moving Forward brought experts in to evaluate what happened, what went wrong at Camp Lejeune. I suggest you go back and listen to those hours of hearings. I have, and they are both enlightening and frightening because the actions that happened at Red Hill over the last two years are simply demonstrating how history is repeating itself. Your island and its people will suffer the long-term consequences. I have linked those sources in my submitted written testimony, and I encourage you to read and listen to that. Highlights from water experts at those congressional hearings include, number one, drinking water and groundwater test result delays, delays that prevented experts from intervening on behalf of families. For Hawaii, the Hawaii Department of Health did not receive groundwater test results of May to December of 2021 until August of 2022, over a year later for some of those results. Catherine, can I ask- Number two, experts testified. Yes. Yes. Yes. Number two, they testified that medical and lack of medical information provided to experts did not aid families. Number three, the lack of knowledge that the chemical, daily chemical handlers and water providers within the DOD had, did not, had a negative impact on people's health because they did not understand the effect of contaminants finally water experts testified that the military water procedures and protocols were consistently in here to neighboring municipalities I urge you to do all they can within the main your means to secure and protect your aquifer. Thank you. Thank you very much, Catherine. Next I have Hayalani. Unmute yourself, go ahead. Aloha. The Joint Task Force on Red Hill should be reporting to the Commission every month. It has been over a year since the Secretary of Defense stated he would defuel the tanks, and there is still 100 million gallons of fuel sitting above our sole source aquifer. The National Defense Authorization Act of 2023 that was recently passed requires the Secretary of Defense to certify that the red hill facility is not essential before it can be defused a certification that has yet to happen there has been less than a handful of in-person town halls and public informational meetings that the joint task force has held in person in the communities there is still no public oversight and no avenues for public input and dialogue in the process of shutting down and defueling the aquifer for the whole island is in danger the community most especially the kanaka maoli have to have a say when the cleanup and remediation is complete the red hill bug fuel storage facility needs to be shut down completely and the facility should never be reused or repurposed the facility should be a monument if we make it through this with our aquifer okay, as what could happen if we choose to put the life and future of this island in the hands of the military again. The Department of Defense are the biggest gaslighters. Their concern for safety is now being used to slow the timeline for defuming, which to date has yet to be certified by the Secretary of Defense. If the U.S. Navy and the Department of Defense was concerned about safety, those tanks would have been defused eight years ago after the 2014 spill, which poisoned residents who are still dealing with long-term health issues. If the Navy was concerned about safety, then they would have informed the 93,000 residents of the Navy water distribution system that their water was contaminated and not waited for the media to inform the public and publish the video of the few shooting from the pipe that was released by a whistleblower. If they were concerned about safety, they would reveal the video showing the people spill to the public. Information has yet to has to be more forthcoming so that the residents can make decisions that are right for their own families. As an example, Iroquois Elementary School, where staff and children are unable to drink the water. Why is that? Why are they getting support from the Department of Defense, where they were told that their water is safe to drink? There are still hundreds of families in affected areas that don't have access to clean water. An example are the residents of Copilina Beach homes. Despite the fact that the Department of Health stated that the water is safe to drink in early 2022, the families of Copilina are still getting sick and rashes on their bodies. It is speculated that the pipes are still contaminated. Almost done. The Department of Defense is not moving in the speed of safety. They are moving at their own speed. They have done this in other communities and they are the ones that really know how bad the situation is. If they have nothing to hide, they would be transparent about what else is being started at Red Hill and they would release the video of the PIFA spill. Here is another example of how the Department of Defense gaslights the Red Hill. I want to make this point because this was brought up in the presentation. The Red Hill Clinic, since they opened in january they have only seen 91 people as of last thursday that means the clinic has seen one person on average per day there is still 100 million gallons of fuel sitting above our aquifer why is the military setting the timeline and dictating the timeline? They created this water crisis. Last sentence. The first step in building trust should be for the military to respond to the numerous FOIA requests for information on what happened in regards to the spills and what the reality is in terms of the conditions of the tanks. Mahalo. Thank you very much, Heilani. Next I have is Susan. Susan. Susan, are you there? Yes. Go ahead. You have three minutes. Thank you. I already sent in a written testimony with questions, so I will not be going over those again. From the presentations, I came up with a few more. This week, the water is being removed or the condensation is being removed from the fuel tanks. And part of it is to check the fuel's quality. Just wondering if the fuel quality is low, obviously it can't be reused. Will the water condensation removal or dewatering need to be done prior to defueling again since condensation builds up? Can we also have new heat maps showing the plumes, maybe monthly updates to a website? And I think Phoenix used to do this. The tape tightness wasn't asked or explained in the Gantt chart. And can you please add tape cleaning to your executive summary? I'm going to assume that is going to happen after the defueling. During the dewatering, what safeguards are in place to make sure that no fuel is being released since you have to separate the fuel from the water? I'm understanding the fuel is on top and the water is on the bottom. I'm not expecting any answers. I'm just saying that from a public's point of view this wasn't explained in the video on the red hill tax task force site and i watched that just to get my information so it was a good job it just didn't go into too much detail um keep up the good work make sure those valves got replaced ensure that they work as designed that was part of the problem and if you aren't familiar with it the failure mode effects analysis will certainly help you in preventing catastrophes and anticipating what could go wrong. Thank you. Thank you very much, Susan. Next I have is Danny. Aloha. My name is Danny Espertu. I live in Waimalu and I'm a Mokopewa and I'm zooming in from there. During the presentation, I don't know how it was in in Krna where you folks are, but it started to pour heavily on our side. And I contextualize this because part of me, you know, we care for our loi kalo down the street in our area. It's the last Iqalua in this entire community and it's projected to be affected by the fuel spread and contamination due to the red hill facility. I'm not sure whether to be relieved that the aquifer is being recharged or concerned that there is now the spread of PFAS throughout our community. And so to also contextualize, if I walked on the street about 10 minutes I'll hit Pu'uloa, the very spots that my grandparents used to gather food that we can no longer touch the water from because of military contamination. And so my comments are contextualized based on my family's, the severing of my family's relationship with these lands. And really commissioners, I thank you for the opportunity to speak, but the ability of our people to be able to eat to be able to connect with our streams to be able to subsist on our island period is really in your hands at this point like we may be witnessing the birth of the last generation that will ever be able to play in freshwater streams on our island because of the spread of PFAS in our area and that was something that I thought was missing in the discussion from today. How will the commission be regulating PFAS if there's no disclosure of where things are being stored, there's no disclosure of the quantities, if there's no disclosure of what chemicals are being stored at the facility which BWS and other folks have been asking the military for decades um in addition there is a comment and i appreciate that from one of the presenters that um there's a commitment to gather every last drop how is it possible uh to hold the navy accountable to this and to hold the dod accountable to this if there's been no disclosure of what is actually being contained in the facility or in any of the facilities and and what is the commission doing about that? In addition, what about the upwards of 200,000 gallons of legacy fuel? And what does remediation look like in Forest Rock? There is a lot of talk of monitoring and containment, but what does true remediation look like? In addition, there is talk of the Aeahalava shaft being put back online. How would that affect the spread of fuel, not just into our public drinking water system which is a huge concern but also affecting the springs and the streams in our areas yeah our loikalo that we care for in kalo is spring fed as that comes online will that cause the plume to move toward that loikalo and make it completely unusable both in terms of fuel spread as well as in terms of other contaminants. In addition, I have huge concerns with the idea of repurposing the tanks for non-fuel use, if they're not made completely unusable in the future. Yeah, there's a big difference between repurposing and full closure and decommissioning. And we have not really had that conversation out. And are there capabilities within the commission to hold the Navy accountable to that? The survey online by Nakupuna doesn't even offer that as an option to make the tanks completely unusable and the future should a new administration decide that it wants to use that. In addition, the talk about monitoring- Can you summarize? Yeah, sure. So the talk about monitoring wells. Can you summarize? Yeah, sure. So the talk about monitoring wells in terms of BWS, DOH, EPA, the UH Red Hill Task Force, all folks have asked for access to the AUV's wells and that's not happened. And so is there any way to get access to the 43 wells that will um that will be um that will be constructed and so mahalo nui for your time again commissioners like we as the public are relying for on you folks future generations are relying on you folks and so we ask that to the extent that you have legal capability to please hold them accountable to timelines as well as harsh punishments mahalo mahalo danny appreciate that I see is that Gina there's two more that sign on and right is it back on and then Gina Haro okay Gina go ahead can you unmute yourself should I go or should Ann no why don't you go ahead hi um I want to stay as positive as possible, and I'd like to focus on remediation as it was defined today that you just skim the top of the water the aquifer everything from the top to the bottom is this is what's so confusing is the the condensation that you that you're talking about to wipe or whatever the whole the whole land is the aquifer from the surface. So remediation will, in my mind, involve natural, not natural attenuation, which means to us doing nothing. It means looking at indigenous microorganisms attenuated with those microorganisms that feed on the toxins. So we need an accounting of what has been brought into Hawaii, for example, PFAS and all of the array of other toxins that are in all the other wells. We need to know what is missing because that's how we know it's in the aquifer and we need an accounting of what we're going to do with all of these toxins because it is present when i look at for the past eight years i'm looking at this whole system which um which has been going on for meeting after meeting after meeting. These meetings don't work because we never actually address the issue other than one-way communication from the community for two to three minutes. So what I'm going to say might go out into outer space and we won't continue this conversation. I believe that this system is not just the Navy system, but also on the Hawaii side, our system of not addressing each point. This is what caused the 2021 spill because we already had this happen in 2014. I was going to every single meeting until recently. There's too many meetings. I can't make each meeting. The FTAC, for example, is every six months. When you brought up the issue, do we have enough staff on this? There are so many issues that are talked about in two hours none of I've never been to a meeting where actually anyone actually talked about remediation for more than 30 seconds one way from our side so you know can I ask you to summarize okay so my summary is from that, this commission needs to have at least two hours on remediation, a meeting only on that. This is my ask. Can you please commit to this? Thank you. Thank you very much, Gina. I see I've got two other people. It looks like Noel Shaw and Anne Wright. And we did receive your written testimony. Would you like to add something to that? Yes, thank you very much. Just a few short comments other than the written. Number one, I'm glad that we're starting to slow down what water is going into Halawa stream from 5 million down to 3 million. But, you know, that's almost already almost 2 trillion gallons, although I can't read the number of zeros when you multiply it out. I mean, there's a lot of water that's been wasted that we've got to find some way to use that water. It just can't continue going down Halawa stream. Also, we need the statement from the Secretary of Defense that this is a firm commitment, and the NDAA, it was in there that he has to make another statement saying this is a firm commitment to shut down and close up Red Hill. So we need that. We also need the video of all the PFASas i cannot believe as a retired army colonel 29 years in the military i cannot believe that our military is still not letting that video uh be made available to the public it's just it's just outrageous uh talk about transparency there you go uh also how many civilians have taken advantage of going to the red hill. And over a year after all of this has happened, finally, there is a Secretary of Defense determination that they can. But, boy, we've got to do a lot better on taking care of the public that puts up, and I'm 29 years in the Army, puts up with the military living on their lands so there's a lot more that has to be done uh i appreciate all the information given today but there are a lot of some very basic questions that still need to be answered thank you thank you very much ann i appreciated both your written and your oral testimony did mr shaw leave is he online I don't see him. Yeah, not on. Okay. So with that i'm gonna close. Does anybody in this room want to test want to provide comment? All right. So with that i'm gonna close public testimony, and I greatly appreciate the presentation by all of you. Obviously you heard some good comments from the commissioners who appreciated the comprehensive testimony you've heard regular updates has been a request so hopefully we will get to that whether it's quarterly okay and so with that thank you so very much. Thank you very, very much. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Oh yeah, and we need a certified laboratory on Oahu, please. Thank you very much. And also the aquifer in Okinawa was destroyed by PFAS in the past few years. They came to warn. Also an update on the next step tack in June. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. I really appreciate it. With that being said, we are going to move back to our agenda, and we're gonna do item B. you want to make sure you get the right people in the room all right sorry managing technical and presenting i can add in the d1s yeah be once yeah yeah oh sorry sorry i thought we were recessed okay okay everything until you get caught if you could keep you yourselves on mute um we are going to do item b1 approval of stream diversion works permit application and special conditions to each So with that stuff I will i'm sorry try let me try and apologize for the committee. Okay, Hello, chair and commissioners. clear manual deputy with the water. Commission. i'll be presenting the item today, and basically staff stands on its recommendations and I'll read through them but as chair mentioned item B1 is related to the approval of stream diversion works permit application SDWP.5951.6 with special conditions to East Maui Irrig company llc for abandonment of stream diversion works number 184.6 allowing the application applicant to breach and remove the kapala alaya dam three seed and add erosion protection uh this is located on papalua or in Maui, Praxama Key 228007001. So just real quick, this is the applicant is East Maui Irrigation Company. This is a stream diversion works permit to abandon this stream diversion works and modify and make improvements to that intake or that in stream dam. With that, I'm just going to go through the recommendations based on staff's review and analysis as that's laid out in the submittal so the recommendation is that the commission one approves the stream diversion works permit to abandon stream diversion works permit number 184.6 breach and remove the kapala alaya dam reseed and add erosion protection measures subject to the standard conditions in exhibit four of the submittal and the special conditions below so the first question position a is that the applicant shall provide the results of the hec hms report to the county of Maui planning department, floodplain manager and the commission. B, the applicant shall forward a copy of the dam safety permit application that they need to submit to the commission following submission to the engineering division. C, in conformance with the division of forestry and wildlife recommendations incorporated by reference in exhibit two, the permittee shall observe the recommended construction measures regarding the protection and conservation of native species and prevent the introduction and spread of invasive species the abandonment of the stream division works permit is subject to shifty concurrence if shifty requires conditions that this commission delegates to the deputy director to attach those as conditions of abandonment and lastly the applicant shall contract contact and consult with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to address their concerns and provide evidence to the commission of such consultation okay very good thank you very much I'm going to now open it up to commissioners. Michael, I see your hand up. Yeah, Claire, this seems like the theme for this meeting. No, obviously our East Maui decision was abandoning a lot of unnecessary diversions yet, we talked about the potential for storage of reservoirs and so what i think is did any analysis go into it is this a potential reservoir or dam that that could offer opportunities to store excess water and uh if not and as you know there there is a Senate Bill 1066 that the commission might be setting up a priority list of capital improvement projects that could include restoration of dams and reservoirs. So the question is, was any analysis done on this reservoir? And if not, could, I know you read the news today and the land board is looking at a decision on Kalihiwai and Kauai. It's just important that we kind of go through that thought process before we close down these reservoirs. Is this an important reservoir? Whose partner, what would it take to restore it? Does it offer us opportunity? So that's as much of a comment, but I'm just curious on this one, was there any analysis done in that regard? Mahalo Commissioner Buck. I will start the conference, the response, and then we do have the applicants here and they may be able to address directly more of your comment about analysis of use, et cetera. So specifically to the water commission commission that level of analysis of use of reservoirs for storage etc in this context isn't something that we we've looked at right now this is just the stream diversion works permit um as it relates to dam safety dam safety is working with the applicant to review it i i don't know in as state as a whole who is ultimately responsible for kind of driving this analysis. Is it Department of Ag? Is it the state engineering? You know, in DLNR. Right now the Water Commission isn't doing that analysis, level analysis, something that we could look at and into um but that's not currently what we're looking at right now it's period from the regulatory perspective that we're looking at it um it could become more of a component of for example the statewide projects plan um but as you and just to note this is a private dam right on private property so we you know to an extent the state works with private parties to to help support them and analyze that but we've never really done that analysis on non-governmental you know public plans um to look at this approach approach comprehensively i don't know if um mark or anyone else from my phone yeah uh uh aloha chairperson chang and uh fellow commissioners and deputy manuel mahalo for having us um you know i just wanted to say early in 2000 in the early 2000s we kind of did an internal analysis of this dam and looking at not just historical, but just in the time that I've worked here in my 25 years, we're looking at the amount of time that reservoir actually held water. When we were in sugar, we've been farming all these years and we were looking at the amount of time that that reservoir held water. And at the time, even on a conservative basis, we were looking at like 20% of the time. Now with climate change, as we had that excellent presentation on earlier, climate change is another different, it's a whole nother different animal, but with climate change, with just the changes in the atmosphere, in the area I've seen over my 25 year career, we'll be talking about even less amounts of water in the atmosphere in the area i've seen over my 25 year career we'll be talking about even less amounts of water in the reservoir and speaking briefly with you know dam safety over the years i've been working with them closely for many many years and you know we've been talking about this remediation of this magnitude would be anywhere from, you know, could be possibly from 12 to 15 million dollars. And for something like that to hold water 15% of the year, I know water is important, but for 15% of the year, that's just a tough pill to swallow for anyone. Is it an important reservoir? It is, but we've been able to function without it since 2007. We haven't operated it since 2007, and we've been able to function without it since 2007. We haven't operated it since 2007 and we've been able to function without it and then you add the IIFS that's come in that's just even less water that's available for the reservoir so we just felt that this was the time plus there are safety hazards in there that could potentially get worse so we just felt like this was the time to address this and so we came up with that with our own internal analysis yeah mark and i appreciate that i think we totally understand that a lot of the private dams and reservoirs are a liability right now for private landowners and i think we we're pushing at the legislature to understand that and there has to be a modicum of public funding in partnership with private landowners to at least preserve the important reservoirs that offer a whole multitude of benefits. So I hope in your analysis, and I totally appreciate it from your perspective, that you keep that in mind and you can share with us like some of the factors that what would it take on the public side to help you preserve this might not be the reservoir that we're talking about but i think in the future there will be public funds available to try to partner with private landowners to be able to restore and bring these reservoirs and dams back up to a level because they don't produce a lot of public benefits in addition to potential water storage during dry times and to capture episodic rain events. So I just appreciate, because I know you do have a lot of dams and reservoirs in your portfolio, that if you can provide us that kind of context that will help at least the public policy makers to identify the public benefits involved and the types of contributions from the public side that would work in partnership with you to keep some of these dams and reservoirs in place thank you well thank you for your uh your comments commissioner buck um yeah we've taken all of that into consideration and we are working on remediation projects for other dams and reservoirs that we feel would be more strategic and more beneficial, not just for the farm, because these are all just farm reservoirs. They don't supply anything to the public, but we're talking about making improvements to other dams and reservoirs that are gonna be strategically important for us. Well, I would check out Senate Bill 1066, and it does ask the Commission for next year to come up with a priority list of capital improvement projects that include both public and private contributions. So hopefully we can use your data to come up and help move up some of the list of these priority reservoirs. Thank you. Thank you. Do you have any other questions from the Commissioner? up and help move up some of the list of these priority reservoirs thank you thank you do you have any other questions from the commissioner aurora is your hand up go ahead i do um thank you deputy manuel for um presenting that i guess i'm mostly responding to some written testimony received and we'll probably hear about later, about not the agricultural use for climate change, but the other end of it. I first read stream diversion records and then I read dam, and those sort of confer different levels of hazard and risk to downstream communities. And so I wanted to better understand what the status of the engineering review is, and also any potential dialogue with SHIPTI since the submittal was posted, given, you know, archeological features might not be on site, but they might be affected by changes in the flow regimes especially during high um high rainfall events yeah i'll start and then um see if we can address some of these questions again um so related to what's before you is when what we have authority over is the stream diversion right and so in this case the stream the dam itself is the what is diverting water and that's just the design and how it was developed right so one of the permits that we require is stream diversion works abandonment if you're going to you know formally abandon a permit in this case because it's also a dam they have to comply with dam safety standards and their application review process so what we're trying to do is make sure that on our books the diversion is taken off it's no longer a diversion something that's allowed allowing the applicant to divert water um but on the dam safety side how how that's designed, how it manages the, you know, water flooding, etc. That application is still in process based on what we understand. So there's still going to be that process that DLNR and Dam Safety is going to look at in terms of managing potential downstream impacts. We also submitted this to SHFTI, but haven't received a response yet. If SHFTI does come back to the commission with recommended preservation or archeological inventory, then we would add that as conditions to this permit. And if the applicant is not happy with that, then we'd come back to the commission basically and say, here's the situation, this is what SHFTI is recommending. We're saying to, you know, add it as a condition. But the applicant may have concerns or not want to address that. Those are things that we can address as part of this process. Right now we're, we're taking our, our piece of the pie in this larger decommissioning effort to make sure we're meeting our compliance requirements so that's my simple response to um where we're at um question so does engineering division have regulatory oversight or they just they have regulatory oversight over the dam and how it's designed and dirty commission so they issue permits to do that and manage it and fine and have regulatory, so the board of land and natural resources manage and will manage that process. removal meets their requirements. I guess I'm worried that if we approve something, but then we take on the liability in case that it becomes a hazard. So, okay. So we're seeing these as parallel processes. Right. So that's the way I understand it. I apologize that dam safety is not here or engineering is not here. And maybe I can ask Ryan who's online to run down the hallway and see if we can get somebody from engineering to jump on, that'd be great. But they did review the application and their comments were like, we are working with the applicant on their dam removal application and we'll be coordinating that. And so again, the applicant on their dam removal application and we'll be coordinating that and so i again you know the applicant is here and is going through all of the regulatory requirements in order to be compliant with the work that they're proposing um so you know maybe i don't know if mark does have any additional information to share based on their conversation with dam safety but from in our perspective we're coordinating on the water commission side dam safety is we'll be reviewing it on the land board side which is purely within their authority and regulatory review yeah um yeah we've been working with dam safety for quite a while on the removal of this and you know meeting all of the requirements and their criteria, design criteria, restoration criteria, all of that. As Kaleo mentioned, we are in Shipti review. They're reviewing this currently. And I know that Pilali Bay, a lot of the archeological sites there are awesome. And they've definitely been inventoried and I'm sure that SHIPTE would have something to to add about that okay anything Aurora do you have anything tag on to following up with that comment mark under the engineering and the abandonment uh with working with engineering on the dam safety site what is what is going to be physically done are you going to have to you know because i'm thinking about environmental impacts because because water commission is saying there's no ea trigger but i'm wondering you know is there a trigger at the dam safety side that's a great question. So dam safety gives us the requirements to complete removal of the embankment. And they do flow dynamic studies to decide the width of the breach in the actual removal. So we have to take out the entire embankment that has to be removed off site and then all of the sedimentation has to be protected and the stream bed has to be protected with um just thousands of yards of riprap just large boulders and rocks that are placed along the bottom to keep the sediment from flowing out there's embankment restoration on either side of the stream banks that has to take place so that we minimize any downstream you know impacts along the way it it's a whole transformation of basically it's as best as possible restoring everything to what it was prior to this dam being built in 1885 that's the goal of dam safety is obviously the safety but then also the restoration ecologically the restoration and the entire waterway being restored to, you know, pre-contact. I shouldn't say pre-contact, but pre-erection of the dam itself. That might be pre-contact. I'm just joking, I'm just joking. But do you know whether they're going to require an environmental assessment be completed? I don't know. I don't believe so. I think just the whole, I'm not sure we went through this before with them on Kapakalua Dam, and that wasn't required for that. But again, I've been given a list of, we were given a list of the requirements, and we didn't see that on the requirements. That may be a question for them safety though yeah we'll check with them prior to coming to the board because i'm just thinking i mean that's a lot of the restoration of the embankment you're moving a lot of potential dirt or soil and putting rocks there must be some there may there might be some impact so okay that may be a more relevant question to engineering department than to seaworm because before us Khalil is only the abandonment of the stream diversion right so in this case it's it's kind of not awkward, but there's overlap, right? Where what is the thing that is diverting water is a dam. I mean, it functions as that. And most of diversions do too, but sometimes we just have a pipe or a pump that's located in the stream. In this case, what we're primarily doing, and this is ultimately tied to follow-ups of abandonment of diversions for east maui irrigation throughout the decision in order us working with east maui to get through this is to take off take the kuleana off of east maui that once this is done we don't have to regulate them as a diverter and they are no longer required to like report to us and meet all those compliance requirements. Kind of clean up the books, but this is part of that formal process. No, appreciate that clarification and appreciate the good work that you guys are doing, Mark. I guess sometimes when there's overlapping jurisdiction, you don't want something to fall through the cracks. Right. Yeah. So, okay. Question, oh, Aurora. One more question. And I think, Aaron, is Question? Oh, Aurora? One more question, and I think, Aaron, is that you in the in the room? Is there someone from stream protection and management? Yes, I brought it. Yes, as I'm thinking about this, it seems like the engineering division is gonna have more information on how this changes flow. And my understanding of climate change is we're gonna see more higher highs and lower lows, and then you remove a reservoir and you're gonna also see higher highs. And so I'm a little bit worried about the downstream implications of that. You know, we might wanna restore to a pre-dam period, but our climate is not pre-dam. And so, like, Aaron, can you speak a little bit to your understanding of the stream? I read this in the middle, but I think without being there, it's hard for me to wrap my brain around what this means. Sure. Aaron Strauch from the Stream Protection and Management branch. This dam is an in-stream dam, so it captures any high flow events that are coming downstream. The frequency with which these high flow events are occurring is changing as you mentioned, but the peak flow estimates are based on a fairly long period of record that whether it's USGS or any sort of engineering model will provide for you. It's based on a long term record. It's not projecting out what the future peak flow events are going to be like. But the peak flow events, I quickly ran the numbers. The two year flood event peak flow events, I quickly ran the numbers, the two year flood event peak flow is about 550 cubic feet per second, which is roughly 300 billion gallons per day. The dam itself was only 100 million gallon so even currently the the peak flow that would occur every other year would still be over topping the existing structure so the fact that we are um getting rid of it isn't going to affect the the regularity with which the high flow events are making it past the dam. Does that answer your question? So that's the periodicity. Like now you don't have this hundred million gallon buffer. So you actually are going to increase maybe the frequency of like if you're downstream, you're going to increase the frequency at which we see these like bumps. And I guess I just wanna better understand. Well, so there are still upstream diversions on in the watershed. So those lower flow frequent, you know, less magnitude flows are still gonna be captured by whatever diversions are in place. What I'm saying is even the two-year storm event was overtopping existing infrastructure. So it wasn't making a big impact on reducing the frequency of high flow events downstream. It may have made a small impact on the magnitude, but not the frequency. Okay. And I guess, well, maybe that's my question. I guess I'm just, I'll pass it to Wayne. I'm processing when your hand is up. Go ahead. Oh, yeah. Thank you, Chair. Hi, Ryan. I guess let me ask the question the other way with the removal of this buffer and looking at the requirements of other diversions downstream, how does it affect them during the low flow? Because now you have no release, even if you had 100 million gallon storage that somehow was controlled, you have no control now. So does that, how does that impact those diversions and those users so what uh i understand about the watershed is that all of the divergence downstream are owned or operated by east maui irrigation so how they manage their system whether they release water from the reservoir or not it would only be impacting themselves is is that what you're asking like what is the implication for downstream users yes yeah so it would I don't see it as being consequential. And so during peak flows, the attenuation of the flows, how does it affect downstream users or facilities at the stream mouth, for example? Will they get the full effect of the downstream landowners are primarily EMI themselves. It's private property as far as I know. The larger flood events say the one in 10 year flood that is now occurring more regularly as expecting with climate change. The one in 10 year flood event was 1300 CFS so approximately 900 million gallons per day, that that dam is going to have no impact on that flow event. So that we're not we we don't predict that removal of the dam is going to substantially affect the magnitude or the frequency of the high flow those major flooding events and and you said the emi manages low flow events so that's not an issue as well for them yeah and of course division is going to go through all this analysis as well. Paul Minehart, Okay, good thanks, thank you. Karen Grove, I don't see any other hand oh go ahead, Paul. Paul Minehart, Thank you very much in our question really for for mark. Paul Minehart, This damn presumably was built for good reason, because it was necessary either to slow down large rainfall events and flooding. But secondly, I would think it was built as a storage device for irrigation of farmland, whether it's HG&S or other users. And somebody spent a fair amount of money to build it in the first place is that need prospectively non-existent today in other words is there no reason for that additional storage storage by the way is very expensive to build you know that and this dam if it was reconstructed today from scratch would probably be uh impossibly expensive to build um is it something that is really unnecessary prospectively for the future as a storage device so we took all that into account and yeah i'm sure you did. Thanks. When this was back in the early 2000s when we did our own internal, and that was with Sugarcane. And in the projection cave, Mahipono took over, and now we're looking at storage for the Mahipono part, which the plan is to use half of the water that we used back when we were in Sugar. And that's currently what we're doing. We're trying to meet that plan. In that plan, the storage of that reservoir, because that reservoir holds, actually, let's go back. It doesn't hold 100 million. My records indicate like 52 million gallons. And that was prior to, I mean, we didn't dredge anything in all the years. Granted, I've only been here for a little over 25 years, but we didn't dredge anything in all the years. And granted, I've only been here for, you know, a little over 25 years, but we haven't dredged it or tried to remove anything. So that has settled in. So there's probably even less storage in it now. You say that it's expensive to rebuild. I 100% agree with that. They're also very expensive to bring into compliance. They're expensive to maintain. They're expensive to operate. And then you carry the liability that goes along with that. And just in that whole analysis, we kind of realized that the amount of water, like I said, in my career, I've seen water in there lucky if 20% of the year and now we're talking about climate change that we did before we're talking about climate change where water even less of the year there's going to be water in there so is it worth expending that amount of money to preserve something that's even less and it just becomes more and more difficult it's a question of economics you know as far as maintaining or um bringing the damage to compliance remediating all of the things that we need to remediate. So it just ended up being that, unfortunately, that it's not going to be as beneficial to us as we would have liked it to have been. Understood. Thanks for that. Let me ask you a hypothetical question. If there were a government agency responsible for managing distribution of water resources. Would it make any sense to have a governmental agency take over the responsibility for this dam and to manage it for the community interest in the long run um one of the things that that that's uh poignant in my memory was the uh sort of devolution the uh disrepair of uh the west naui ditch that ran from uh from uh rita kapalua west mali airport all the way to uh to uh you know the pali um and uh that was largely made unfeasible in terms of operation by virtue of uh the decommissioning of reservoirs along the way and uh i can't speak to the issue of the west maui system understood understood thank you that's it yeah the location the current location of couple of alaya dam where it is located and the ditch that it does supply, that water is completely farm water, only farm water. It doesn't service the community in any other way, but just bringing water across just to irrigate crops. If we had, you know, it's got that particular dam has, I think of all of the dams that we do have, downstream dams at EMI, I think that has the smallest think of all of the dams that we do have on stream dams at emi i think that has the smallest watershed of all of them as well so again it's something that um that's definitely not the biggest bang for our buck that's just a really small pop if you if you will thank you thank you for for answering those difficult questions I and sharing your wisdom um in that respect and certainly respect uh EMI's position with respect to the decommissioning on that and there are good reasons for it from your perspective thank you thank you thank you commissioners I do have some to provide comments so um uh we have um the first one I see is that Lucienne and then um Justin okay Lucienne yes unmute yourself go ahead I have I don't have a video so it color my uh thank you I'm Luciennee. I'm chairperson of the Sierra Club Maui Group. Sierra Club is hiked in this area, and I personally have been taken here by members of our Kanaka community who are very familiar with it. I think first thing to make clear is these streams are not part of the east maui decision there's no iifs on the streams that flow into pilali bay halehaku bay where this uh dam um would uh release water the stream would release water no one lives in the bay the land is no longer owned by emi it's owned by kamehameha schools that wishes to pursue conservation and restoration so hopefully they could have a say in what's happening uh it is a place that can be subject to some very large water events uh but regardless of what's being said that the only regulatory power is just you know whether there's a permit or not a permit for the removal of the dam I would think that analysis would say you know what is the effect on traditional Hawaiian practices if kalo is restored here and there's a big storm event have we planned for that do has that been taken into account so I'm not saying that um you know it's your responsibility but I'm saying that this should be revealed during the process it shouldn't be oh everything will be positive for Native Hawaiian culture um there's no real facts to support that also it's not clear whether any actual water would be released in the stream except for high storm events so if it's only high storm events i just have to tell you you know we've almost lost a bridge in honopo uh people were you know damaged by other high storm events they're getting gnarly and no engineering is calculating for this you know it's nobody's fault but somebody should be thinking about it and putting ourselves in little silos of oh it's this department and that department doesn't really work and one of the other things we really suggest is the ahumoku Council be consulted I I guess these things get sent to Oahu we have an ahumoku Council and hamakualoa in fact Miss Miss Costa is the po-oh uh and they do have knowledge of this area, and they should be part of the consultation. If the restoration is done in a way where, you know, everybody means well, but it doesn't really work out, it just means a lot of mud washing down into a very important fishery, and that's never a good outpat. So, you know, we really have questions here. That's why we submitted comments and pictures so you could understand. This dam does not impact anyone living below it. No one lives below it except the remains of an extensive Hawaiian complex, most of which has never been inventoried. Only the sites right at the bottom around the hayow may have had some inventory work back in the 70s but those pictures i sent you i have never seen a study of any of that area it is not inventoried and it shouldn't be you know implied that it is it's a very very extensive complex so mahalo for listening I know you your purview is limited but um if there's a way of having like an inventory done while the process of the the dam not to hold up the process but while the process of the dam you know reconstruction or whatever is being done uphill then if anything happens we won't have lost contact with that part of our history. Mahalo. Thank you, Lucienne. So I do have Joycelyn Costa. If you unmute yourself. Joyce Lynn? Is she there? I don't see her. She's having issues. Oh. Does she want to try to recall back in? She did about like five times. Oh. Oh. There she is. Oh, nope. Oh, I was here. Yeah, go ahead. Are you there? Oh, sorry, Joyce Lynn, we can't. We see your name on the screen, but we can't hear you. Is there anyone else? Do you have anybody else on the line? Oh, Jason Kent? I don't see him. Oh, Jason Kent. I was wondering if I could. Hello? Yay. It comes on and off. Joyce Lynn. Hello? Yep, go ahead. I was wondering if I could call in because my bandwidth is kicking me out every so many seconds. Yeah, yeah. Go ahead. Well, oh, darling, can could call in because my bandwidth is kicking me out every so many seconds. Yeah, yeah. Go ahead. Oh, darling, can she call in? You gotta send a phone number to her. Okay, and then who does she call? She calls the number and it automatically logs in. Okay, Joycelyn, does she have her email address? I'll send it to you. can we just say though on i emailed it to nadine just a little while ago letting her know about my yeah she got it but can we just tell her all over the what the number is okay go ahead the phone number uh you can call oh you know what it's easier to send because the number and the passports are oh okay i'll stand by on my email okay very good in the meantime jason did you want to say anything you're on telephone sure thing yeah hi my. Hi, my name is Jason Kent. I am with Kleinschmidt Associates. We are the consultants for East Maui Irrigation. And I just joined the call to be available for any questions. So I don't have any testimony or comments right now. However, there was a question that came up earlier that I do have an answer for regarding the question about from a commissioner about whether an environmental assessment was needed. So we have assisted East Maui Irrigation in submitting the Section 404, Clean Water Act permit application to the Corps of Engineers. And part of that is an EA is not required because nationwide permits number 3 and 13 will be applicable to this. But there is a requirement for an Endangered Species Act Section 7 consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and that was recently completed last week. So we have a consultation letter from U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and we are still awaiting the nationwide permits from the Corps of Engineers for Section 404 and then the section 401 blanket coverage from the department of health very good thank you so much jason jason are you on thank you the center of the information oh there you go are Are you there, Joycelyn? Go ahead. You must live in a place where connection is hard. This is Jason Kent. did you hear me before yeah no we did yes yeah no we're trying to get joycelyn costa hold on oh there you go are you there joycelyn i'm i'm trying she's trying to call in to her um oh she's on yeah i'm gonna dial in right now, if that's okay. Yes, yes, please go ahead. We'll wait, we'll wait. Mahalo. Enter your meeting ID ID followed by pound. We'll move right into the waiting room once she joins. Enter your participant ID followed by pound. Otherwise, you are in the meeting now. There are more than 20 are in the meeting now there are more than 20 participants in the meeting this meeting is being you should see we should see a number Oh, there you go. Jason is that you, then you may want to turn up. Oh, okay. The room is it gonna be feedback. I moved you out of the room for your account so you counts you're good go ahead okay and thank you problem if i'm going to be repeating myself for information or or comments that was already made because i wasn't able to listen to everything and especially the presentation kaleo had done but um i'm the Ahamoku representative for Hamakualoa. And what I had saw in part of the communication was that information was sent and there was no comments made. I went back into my history of emails and did not find anything communicated to me. The area that we are discussing today is, I was born and raised in this area. There are families that have yet to be communicated with that I know is associated within that whole that that um that coach uh complex um I've done kuleana personally with my father and and my brother up into that Gulch from from the bay and going Malka um I I'm not against creating something that will prevent harm. I do have reservations as to the way we go about it. uh keeping in mind that this was this what they call diversion or dam or you know was in consideration at the time of the hawaiian kingdom 1885 so there had to have been some intent on it and i need to make sure that i find the stories of the intent so when we do decide to take down something that was intentionally put up and not you know not necessarily for reasons that we understand today in our western mind so that we can then be more responsible for what is down below um and as i'm looking at some of the aerial shots in the maps um I'm wondering who is in danger at this point. And there is injury that could occur, but a lot of it has to do with our culture, the artifacts, the burials, the heiau, and the bay itself, because for my understanding, as my father has conveyed to me, you know, that bay needs to be fortified. It may look like big, huge rough, but it is a temple. It was, you know, there's history there. And Ahamoku, I would, not to delay the process, but I would like to have some consideration of time because I did not personally get this communication. And I'd like to reach out to the Kuleanas here in this area, and especially those that are, you know, feet on, boots on the ground, and that know that, that gulch intimately. And some of them, you know, feet on boots on the ground and that know that that gout intimately. And some of them, you know, the kupuna passed away already, but they have passed over some stories that I think would be key for us to understand how we go about this, if we're even going to do that. You know, there's ways to just drill holes and let the water come out. I don't know. You know, instead of just removing it. Because to me, something in my mind is thinking 1885. And that's a significant date. Pilali Bay is not awesome. It's beyond awesome. That's not even a description of pilalipe it's intentional so from mauka to makai you know um i think there needs to be a little bit more consideration shifty i sometimes you know the function is really hard for me to grasp when we go and we testify and then everything is no significance. I cannot believe the amount of departments that is on this list that said was contacted and there is no response. None. This thing can just go past whatever permitting process or whatever, you know, and so they don't have to do certain things. That would be a grave insult to Hawaii, to Hamakua Law, to the Kuleanas therein. time and pause so we can actually investigate that harm harm yes there definitely is but not in maybe the sense that we're thinking of um residential homes so joyce can i ask you to summarize can i ask you in some ways i i do do not want, I want this measure not to be decided on today and that revisit those departments and like Ahamoku and I would want this body to question how come no one, no one responded. Thank you very much, Jocelyn. And I'm glad we got you connected. Thank you so much for your patience. Thank you very much. I don't see anybody else in, okay. So I'm gonna close public testimony. Do the commissioners have any other questions or comments Mark can I ask you um oh go ahead Neil yeah I was in regard to that local consultation with Aho Moku Council as well as immediate residents it is it possible in uh D of the recommendation to since it's subject subject to shifty concurrence to kind of add them as as kind of a layer uh i'll try to respond you know based on the conversation you know and us having to wait for shifty or and and because this is also tied to a jurisdiction i'm i'm comfortable i i think the question is to mark folks in terms of timeline differing from you know a month or two to do specific outreach to some of the people recommended commitment schools if they are a downstream landowner now then you know just checking in with them if they have any comments on the application department of transportation based on cr clubs comments about whether or not the flood you know the drainage um in the road is sufficient to handle additional flows um mark i i for for staff i i'm comfortable with kind of taking a a quick pause but i need to check in with the applicant if there's any critical time frames. I think, first of all, I think I want to address the Department of Trans. We had extensive consultation with the Department of Trans. We ran the required design flows that they asked us to run through that watershed, and they were the ones who said, yes, you guys are okay to move ahead. And the cover that we do have in place at the highway is sufficient to take the design plot that they gave us. So we did go through DOT. As far as delaying it, I mean, in an ideal world, I think we are sitting on the SHIPDI, as anyone knows that sometimes can be a lengthy review, but it's good because they do, you know, they do turn over all the stones. think that's something that um justin could definitely reach out to shipi to make those concerns known because i think she has some very valid points there and i think those should be addressed or at least at least reviewed i guess i want to address kind of a procedural issue and mark um and maybe mark and khalil in my view from the commission standpoint we we actually have the constitutional obligation article 12 section 7. but that's based upon the information that's presented to us i do not believe that that is a kuleana of our staff to go and gather that information in my mind that is the kuleana of the applicant to provide us with sufficient information to make that analysis so i guess i am proposing something a little different mark can you guys who is you are the applicant can you go talk story with jocelyn and see if you can address some of her concerns that that is part of your application to us rather than having our staff go and do because I do see what Jocelyn is raising is separate and a part of the SHPD. SHPD is kind of like historic preservation. This is kapa'a kai analysis which to me it is identifying what those resources may be and the potential impact. But mark is that something that you emi can go and follow up on ultimately if the if our goal is to decommission this dam and it's going to affect um something that you know the downstream that just feels very strongly about then yes of course i will talk to jason about this I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. I think that's a great point. if we don't have enough information then we shouldn't take action but so I appreciate I appreciate Mark that you guys you know you go and follow up on that makes sense commissioners so that sounds like a deferral like go talk to them and then come and then bring this back yeah the other option that I thought was here uh is is to say here we approve it. If you get concurrence of ship D and if you want to add a whole book or something else we could we could condition that way we don't need to see it touch again if if the concurrence is there. No, I see what you're saying, Neil, I guess for me, and it is sort of addressing Lucy Ann's comment. I don't want to delegate Kapa'akai to SHPD. Okay. I think that is our kuleana as a commission. And I think it is giving us information to make that assessment. So my preference would be that you know, Mark, you tell us when you're ready to come back. I mean, this this reservoir has been abandoned for quite some time. I suspect one one month or two months may not make that much of a difference. I hope I'm I hope that's true. But it'll give you guys time to go out and talk story. And you know, for me, that is more appropriate that we have the landowner talking story with these families who have a connection. Because it is that relationship much more than in my mind, that should not be the Juliana of our staff to do that. Because I don't think we should be accepting that responsibility on behalf of the applicant. And I think SHPD, I wouldn't want to delegate to them that assessment. So if the commission is okay, I would prefer that the applicant mark. I see Aurora's hand now. Go ahead. Yeah, no, I think that's really important is to have that dialogue. But then in the future there might be settings where an applicant has a vested kapaa'akai analysis? Is it complete? Has it met? You know, are we doing more than just citing an oral history, but speaking to the living, practicing practitioners are here today? So I don't want to like seed the staff's role in this because they have so much experience with multiple applications but I agree with you like we don't want to prevent direct communication yeah no no I I appreciate that I mean I think in my mind from a legal standpoint that um staff can do the assessment based upon the information provided. So if there is not enough information, they should let us know that, or we can make that assessment. Or like these public meetings, I really appreciated Jocelyn's comments, because we thought we had contacted Ahamoku, and apparently Jocelyn didn't get the information. So to me, this public platform provides the opportunity for the community to tell us, you know what, you don't have enough information and then we can make the assessment to defer. Because what I don't want to see us happen is that, you know, we're putting that burden on the staff to go out there and do the research. We should be. We should be reviewing the information that is presented to us. If we feel there's not enough information, then to me I don't have I don't have a problem legally saying I cannot fulfill my constitutional obligation. Therefore i'm gonna have to deny the application. I hope we don't have to do that but again I don't want to place that burden on our staff, because then that shifts in my mind it's just the legal burden from the applicant to now see where I'm staff to do. Does that make sense, Michael I see your hand up. I know work this this mark. I appreciate you being in this conversation is so much more broader than just this application. But Michael, go ahead. You have your hand was up. Yeah, I have no problem with the deferral, as we try to get better relationships with restoration of dams and reservoirs. We have three different divisions in our department that are involved and we need to really kind of coalesce and get kind of more organized. And so we can communicate the landowners either restoring or removing dams that the department can have a much more coordinated approach rather than having them step through all three different division approvals that's a good point and i'm i mean i think that point is well taken as a chairperson you're right i mean you know we should be we should be facilitating that coordinated effort especially when landowners are you know rather than having them go through so many different hoops, but when everybody's within our own department, you're right, there should be much better coordination. So point is well taken. I think we will work on that. This isn't gonna be the last one, the last application that comes up. So clearly we will do better internally. Any other questions? So what I sense is, do I need a motion? Do you need an action on this, Chair? Yeah, I see the Deputy Attorney General nodding to me. Yes, we need a motion. Would the appropriate motion be to defer this matter to allow the applicant time to uh confer with uh council and other affected parties uh so that the uh commission can can do a proper kabakai analysis okay oh oh are you gonna second thank you a motion has been made and seconded um any discussion seeing no hands all in favor of the motion please say aye any objection mahalo mahal thank you, Mark. I appreciate your patience with us and willingness to work with us. Mahalo to those members of the public, Jocelyn and Lucienne, who are here to provide us comments. So it is now 1.10. I'm going to take a break. Do you need lunch? Well, we only have one more or two. No, we have two more. So, you know, we're just going to power through. But, I mean, we only have one more or 2. No, we have 2 more 2 more. So you know we're just gonna power through. But I mean we're gonna take a break we're gonna take a 10 min break. Everybody sitting here is willing to just go through and no need to eat lunch. So we're gonna take a 10 min break, and then we're gonna come back, and we're gonna do items B. 2 and B. 3. All all right so let's turn this off you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Thank you, Michael. Wait, is everybody? We are where you can hear us. Okay. So with that being said, we are now going to move to item b two steph um do you have a presentation um again we're gonna stand on our written uh submittal as drafted um and just be mindful of everyone present um here to provide testimony on it but we do want to make a recommended amendment to the action items proposed and primarily just to make sure it aligns with the title as agendas so if i can i'm gonna read through the recommended action and then um i'll highlight the recommended amendment that we'd like you to consider so um recommendation for item b2 is that the commission approved stream diversion works permit uh sdwp 0.5970.4 to abandon stream diversion works number 862.4 by removing pipes and concrete from the west cavella stream subject to standard conditions in exhibit four of the staff submittal and the special conditions below um a in accordance or in conformance with the Division of Forestry and Wildlife Recognitions incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2, the permittee shall 1 cease all work activities when state listed water birds are within 100 feet of the project site, and 2 minimize the movement of plant or soil material between work sites to prevent the introduction and spread of invasive species. I apologize, but that should be B. It's A on the seminal, but it should be B. One B is abandonment of diversion is subject to SHFTI concurrence. If SHFTI requires conditions that this body delegate to the deputy director to attach those as conditions of the abandonment permit. And one C, again, sorry again for the typo, 1C is that in conformance with the US Fish and Wildlife Service recommendations incorporated by reference to exhibit three, the permittee shall one, implement the plan avoidance and minimization measures identified if any work would occur in the nearby terrestrial areas and two to employ applicable best management practices for any in-water work. And the second recommendation is where we're making the amendment that should now read a fine, declare that the project is exempt from EA requirements under HRrs chapter 343 and har chapter 11-200.1 instead of as it's written on the submittal so we're making the same recommendation for item b3 as well uh that was a little oversight when we were working on agendizing the item okay with that being said is the applicant or does that the do the commissioners have any questions for staff on item b2 michael yeah uh clay or some of the response uh are we removing the abandoned pipes and concrete from the stream channel i'm not sure if that's a condition in exhibit four or not uh the way that from what i understand yes the stream as one one item one says remove pipes and concrete from the west cavela stream so yes that's what's being proposed okay Okay, there seems to be, I don't know if there's confusion or that's something just the public testimony wasn't unsure of, but we should make sure we're really clear about that, at least in our minutes at a minimum. Okay, thank you for the clarification. Yeah, the intent of that is to remove basically get rid of the abandoned diversion and remove the pipes and the concrete from the stream itself yeah especially one more comment you know we have so much rare opportunities to actually restore streams uh and and this is the one on molokai that we picked so I think it's really important in this context thank you any other questions or comments from the commissioners I don't see any hands up I'm going to now move to public comment or applicant yeah I'm sorry they want to ask um is the applicant representative here hi chair this is cal chip chase i'm sorry for appearing indeed chair indeed uh with with me too is uh todd svetin with molokai ranch and uh harold edwards with itc our consultant and contractor uh helping us with these matters apologize for appearing by phone if i get to a stable spot i can turn on my video we we um we shared a long day with the commission maybe not in person but remotely and uh and it went a little longer than i anticipated and so i'm between places uh but we support the staff's recommendation as amended by deputy director today and we're just available for any questions the Commission may have. Thank you very much, Commissioners, do you have any questions for the applicant? I do have one question, Chair. How long, I know the actual permit for the diversion I think was 1989. How long is is the ranch been utilizing this diversion? All right, Commissioner, I'll invite either Todd or Harold. Harold also has a long history with the ranch to to provide that information probably more accurately than I can. I mean, I have to guess it's probably in the neighborhood of 80 years or more. I think there's been around quite some time. All right. Paul, did I see your hand up? No. Commissioner, does anybody else have any questions for the applicant? Quick one. Yes, go ahead. or so it looks like this is pretty easy work to take out. It does that include plans of I mean do you guys have to hike in or fly in and and does it include plans to completely remove it from the site? It'll be a matter of hiking in and everything will be moved away from the the stream bed and started some appropriate place off site. Okay, Well, I mean i've had to fly out concrete blocks from my car as part of my CDP and so I just you know that was one of the concerns raised in written testimonies so I think just being clear that that that's part of the um the plan is helpful like commissioner mentioned so thanks any other questions from the commissioners or the applicant before I open it up for public comments? So, Harold, just I'm sorry, Chair. I was just going to say, Harold, when when you say offsite, you mean out of the stream area for possible use in a reactivation of another location. I just want to make sure that we are clear with the commission in light of the public testimony yeah thank you that clarification correct yeah um and khalil can i ask because it's not one of the conditions the removal off site it doesn't say it yeah what our recommendation again because our priority is the diversion and within the stream channel um that's where we focus on. If based on testimony and the conversation, new folks want to recommend that could be taken off site, then that's fine. That's not within what we're recommending. We're just focusing on removing the actual diversion from the stream and the pipe out of the stream so it can no longer divert water, right? That's within the purview of this body the water commission so i know that there was um i kind of jumping that gun i think there's testifiers so maybe we can address that after everyone testifies very good so with that being said i'm going to open it up for public testimony i do do have several people who are here to provide oral testimony. Is it Darlene Matsuoka? Chair, Doreen is with my office. She was going to present with me, actually maybe in place of me, but she had to catch a flight to Kauai for another matter, and I'm on my way to join her. So you're stuck with me this afternoon, that's not so bad thank you very much Cal for that clarification um Riddhi are you there um so chair this is Mahesh Cleveland um I can speak for right now uh but many of the members of Moloka Inoka Heke that had signed up to submit testimony this morning had other kuleana in the afternoon, and the rest of them that had kuleana in the morning didn't sign up and aren't with us this afternoon. And so, unfortunately, this is a unintentional side effect of flipping the agenda around like that, is you folks aren't gonna hear all the public testimony that would have come in otherwise. But there are other members, and I can I can just take my turn when it comes up. go ahead hi aloha sorry i can't see myself in the picture but is this okay can you hear me yes yes we can hear you clearly okay yeah my name is tiavihin um we we're good yeah okay born and raised in cavella um and a member of molokai and i can speak for myself and also all those who are here to testify that my has just mentioned can no longer sit here and testify unfortunately um my pilina with cavella started basically when i was born our father built our home there in the early 70s and we have called this our home ever since the river is basically our backyard um and like any home owner you know we like to keep our area clean our our environment safe, welcoming, healthy. And so I really believe that, well, first of all, I commend Molokai Property Limited for taking the action to rectify the mess. I do feel though, before the permit is granted, that we should clarify what they mean by removal. I don't think removing it to another location in the forest or reorganizing it or rearranging it is what we asking for. We asking for removal of these old pipes and these old diversion materials to be moved out of the forest or properly disposed of as most of them are not probably not reusable. And I feel like this is a small request in the right direction. And yeah, just one more step to getting Kavela fully restored. Mahalo. Mahalo for that. I appreciate that. Is it, I'm going to mispronounce it. Is it now? Rapa pronounce it is and now wrap a knot no I know I do apologize Mahesh that you know we did we we moved up the agenda items but I'm hoping you'll be able to provide us testimony that is consistent with what those who are not able to be here. So I have Lana Corpus. No, Lana is another one of the Moloka'ino Kahake members that had to attend to other kuleana. Okay, Mahish, you're it then. Please, if you can. Okay. And I'll note that there are a couple other folks around now who didn't sign up and they might be able to speak up. But anyway, good morning, Chair Chang, commissioners, Deputy Emanuel and staff. Chair Chang, I have not appeared before you before, so I'll introduce myself. My name is Mahesh Cleveland. I'm an attorney with the Honolulu Office of Earth Justice, and we represent Moloka'iai no Kaheke since we filed their 2019 petition to amend flow standards for these central Molokai streams, prevent further waste of water resources by MPL's uses and relevant to this proceeding, ask that the ranch be compelled to go through the formal abandonment processes for the specific purpose of of cleaning up many of the derelict pipes that are left unused now the two uh diversions in question today west cavella and east cavella tributary have both been defunct and unused for many years um they went in a long time ago uh and and they've sat there unused uh since they were turned off i think um by the time we submitted our written testimony and i also hope that the commission received our supplemental uh letter last night that just had some some pictures sort of showing how the west cavella and east cavella pipes sort Justin Delacruz, CA OSDS, he's the one who's been working on this, and he's been working on this for a long time, and he's been working on this for a long time, and he's been working on this for a long time. on-site storage for disposal because I think to most people the idea of storage conflicts directly with the idea of disposal and since Moloka'i and Okaheke is one of the main initial reasons for pursuing this was to get them to clean up the mess and because the commission actually it's been almost exactly a year to the day commissioners who were here last year when the commission actually it's it's been almost exactly a year to the day commissioners who were here last year when when the commission uh first decided to restore cavella and address a few of these issues but a year ago the commission asked that these uh diversions be formally abandoned for among other reasons to to improve the aesthetic uh and environmental qualities of those streams. And so there's, since we submitted testimony, I was able to get some further clarity from Ms. Matsuoka representing MPL. And as Mr. Chipchase mentioned, I believe the plan is to cut these pipes into manageable sizes. And any of them that can potentially be reused might be stockpiled for future reuse but what I wanted to point out is that the watershed the cavella watershed where these pipes currently sit is is is not is not the same watershed as the intakes that they are considering for potential future reactivation. The Komoku intake, which Ms. Matsuoka mentioned specifically, is actually the next watershed or two over. And so in order to get those pipes from the Kavela watershed over to the Komoku intake, they would have to carry them up out of that Valley and move them down the road anyhow. And so I think a really easy solution might be that Mpl has a facility a little bit further down the road where the various intake pipes diverting the various streams converge into a warehouse and over there seems like would be sort of a logical place to store discarded or I should say reusable unused pipes and any pieces of those pipes that could not be reused should then just be thrown in a truck and taken down the hill to dispose of properly and so I I also wanted to mention that if you look at the pictures of the two different intake pipelines, you'll see that the West Covella pipe is a large black ABS pipe that is strung along a steel cable that runs right up the middle of the West Covella gully. Whereas the East Covella tributary supply pipe actually runs along the access trail from the main East Covella dam around to the East Covella tributary intake. And so the vast bulk of that pipe, which appears to be quite a bit longer than the West Covella one, are actually not within the stream bed, but instead are just laying along the access trail and i'll tell you from personal experience there's a couple spots in that trail a little hairy the thought of stepping on a a piece of pipe in fact there's two old pipes running through there the fact of the the idea of stepping on a piece of pipe while you're trying to navigate that that access is is a little bit hairy and and you know i'll also mention that on various many occasions that Moka Inoka Heke has gone up to visit these sites. We have in fact seen conservation workers research teams accessing these various areas to check on the damsel flies, the native plants, and all the other things that the commission said we should clean up these intakes to protect and so um these are remote trails but they are frequently accessed and well known not only to folks like dr strauch and other researchers but also to the molokai community who regularly go up there uh even when we go they'll stop on the side of the road you know pick some mamaki pick some lehua get some seeds to go plant down makai to restore native plants and so the the bottom line is is that it doesn't make a lot of sense to say that we just need to detach some pipes that are in the actual stream bed and then we can just leave the pipes on site in the same watershed where we know that they will never be used again those pipes will not work they don't integrate with the manes cavella dam which is still not decided yet um but they might work for example kamoku which again is down the road so we respectfully request that the commission uh modify this permit uh in order to require that these pipes, if they're going to be reused, be taken to somewhere that sort of where they can sit with MPL's other stuff. There's an image included in that supplemental submittal. Can I just summarize? Sorry, and I'm also saving a lot of time by not having 10 other people testifying with me, but I will summarize. Is that, I'm sorry, I lost my train of thought. Um, the, the down near the West Cavella intake currently, there's a, there's that image of the old, uh, weir that has a few broken pipes from that same system already piled on it. And and the molkai no kaheka's concern is that on-site storage would just mean piling up however many more lengths of pipe that stacked up on top of that thing right next to a trail um when when if they're going to be using it for kamoku anyway they're going to have to move it up out of cavella and down the road so we might as well do that to keep the area clean and i'll leave it there and i'll note that um i have two molokai nokaheke members here who are free this afternoon but we're not free this morning their names are kahekili pakala and kamaki manangan and with uh with your permission chair i'd like to ask that they be allowed to testify yes um we'll take Kahikili first. Thank you. Aloha, new chair. Aloha. I haven't gotten a chance to meet you. What is your name again? Dawn Chang. Aloha, nice to meet you. my name is kai hili pakala i'm a member of molokai and i would like to ask the commission to urge mpl to remove their rubbish from our streams and our our riverbeds up on our mountaintops. For me, it's kind of, it's not kind of, it's really sad to see things up there that don't belong there, yeah? Like growing up, my mother is a lei crafter. So growing up, we would go up to the mountains to go pick ohia lehua and all the different flowers out of different ferns to make either um or ladies for graduation or special special occasions being that my mom had no daughters she had nobody to pass this tradition on to um for me i take it upon myself to carry on the tradition and pass it on to my kids. So the other day when we went out and just seeing that NPL just doesn't really care about anything that they're doing. They don't care about the water they're diverting. They don't care about the mountains that they're leaving rubbish on. And it's just kind of heartbreaking and very frustrating to know that they're still allowed to do these kinds of things and like the people on our island that frequent these areas have to suffer um other than that i don't have anything else to say anybody got any questions no mahalo brother i appreciate you thank you thank you so there you. Thank you. So there's, Mahesh, you had, there was another person? Yes. Thank you, Chair. Go ahead, introduce yourself. Hello, Commission. My name is Komaki Manangan, and I'm a member of Molokai no Kaheke, and we just please ask that NPL takes out all their rubbish from our mountains. Mahalo. I appreciate your concise testimony brother. Thank you Kamonte. Is there anybody else? Is there anybody else? Actually, yes. We have Matayo Sibayan who I believe did sign up for testimony and lana corpus is joining us now so yeah can i uh i'll have my child yep my name is aj and c by and i'm a member of Molokai N Ka Heke. And as a community member, I ask that the NPL dispose of their rubbish out of east and west tributary. I also think it's dangerous to have old metal and pipes on public on the public access trails thank you mahalo for your testimony have a blessed day you too aloha aloha uh my name is lana corpus um i testify on behalf of the community of Molokai. And just to been a year since all of this started and we agreed to have them clean up and give us food restoration. Yeah, we just ask that they clean up their things. It's kuleana for them. They shouldn't have to be told, should just do it and for the future of molokai we really depend on that you know that responsibility um of these landowners to take care and not just leave it um you bring your rubbish in you take it out we were taught that from when we were young you know so um yeah i just hope that they see that and and they get their stuff together um mahalo for you guys time for letting me testify you guys have an awesome day. Hello, thank you. Mahesh, do you have anybody else? That's all we have, Chair. Thank you very much for allowing everyone to testify. Can I ask you a question? I think it was Mateo who said it's a public trail. Is that right? Those are public trails that are adjacent to the stream. Yeah, so the the the State all a hilly trail system runs up through those mountains, and and the and the multi community regularly access those areas via that trail. You can you can you can actually see kayak, Kili and and Komaki walking next to that pile of rubbish on the trail in that last picture I shared yesterday. Okay, thank you very much. Thank you. Is there anybody else with you, my gosh, or anybody else on the phone? There's no one else with me. is he around? might be nearby, but it doesn't look like there are other members of the public on the line. I don't see. I think he was available. He was part of the applicant team. I think, you know, while many of us might stand on our testimony for this item, for the next item, if there's an opportunity for public testimony when you move to b3 maybe um lehi can join us then that makes sense oh i'm sorry um chair i my apologies miss ritty has just um come and so if if she'll she'll join you go ahead oh i'm so sorry that's's all right. Take your time. Hello, Commission. I'll put opportunity to testify. My name is like you, and I'm providing testimony for agenda B. 2 and B. 3. All I ask is for MPL to clean up their Apollo. The pipes have been there for a long time, and they have no use, so I don't understand why they're still up there to begin with. I've passed by their disposal site numerous times, and it's nothing but just a pile of broken pipes that have collected mold and moss over the years. It's just been sitting there um i feel it's a very kapulu or messy and malwa lazy way to dispose of their rubbish um we are taught from a young age to pick up after ourselves so if they're able to haul the pipes up there they're able to bring it right back down um so this is common sense and I can't believe that the Water Commission has to order Npl to pick up their own rubbish. It will look like my hollow. Well, no, no, no promises, but there's always another agenda item in case. You're right. There's always B3. You're right. So, Commission, do you have any or anyone else? I thought that Todd. Todd is with the... Okay. Commission, do you have... I'm going to close public testimony, Neil. Yes, thank you. Thank you to the community for testifying. Thank you for to the applicant for doing what we ask you to do, and that is to close these diversions down. raised to remove your Opala and it's also just standard business practice in every lease that I ever managed uh the the lessee was required to return the property in the condition in which they've received it or better uh so I can't see I don't see a reason why we can't put in a a little insertion into one of the recommendation that remove pipes and concrete in accordance with a plan that is approved by commission staff so we we just need to see what they're going to do with it we trust our staff if they say they're going to redeploy some of the some of it in a certain way they've got to be present that information to our staff and then it has to be stored accordingly in a credible proposal to reuse something and then stored appropriately. So I suggest that recommendation and I believe that should solve it. Thank you, Neal. I guess I would take that one step further and just say I don't know if we even need a plan. Just remove, remove. My fear is liability. It's an ala heli trail that's adjacent to that. My concern is liability by continuing to have that. And I would believe that MPL, Cal, and your and your team they would be they see that this is appropriate to remove from the property from the state lands all of the abandoned infrastructure that was part of that stream diversion. No need to- Chair, this is- Yes, go ahead. Yeah, yeah, Chair. No, I appreciate those comments and Commissioner Hannes, I appreciate your suggestion. I don't believe it's accurate to call these public lands, Chair, they're private lands. And I'll just make this sort of observation. There's sort the legal and the practical and on the legal side it's important Justin Bauer, to stay within everybody's lanes and do what jurisdiction allows. It would really not be in the Commission's jurisdiction to be beyond the stream area. But as the Chair mentioned, there's also the practical and from the practical side of it i'll invite either carol or todd to explain why we believe these materials may be appropriate for reuse and it's so why um stacking them away from the stream but in the on this property which is owned by mcl uh is appropriate versus moving them down to a home property um i i see commissioner um i see wayne but harold do you want to answer kel's kelton i mean we got a little garbled towards the end but i think everybody heard that um local rights is the fee simple owner of all the land in this forest reserve area. So it isn't state land that we're talking about. And I think everybody that's been up in that area know access is difficult. There was a question earlier whether it was gonna be done by helicopter. We've done a lot of work in the past up there with a helicopter that gets very expensive. So I think what the ranch is looking for is, you know, meet the intent of the Water Commission in a manner that doesn't drive up their cost. And I think everybody aspires to have all the surplus pipe out of there, but that's time and resource constraints. So I think that's, you know, the hope is that the approval will not be more orders than it needs to be financially. And then over time, hopefully some of the stuff that is obviously not able to be reused could get packed out of there. But I mean, it's a significant effort to get into the project work areas and it's a significant effort to get back out of there with with uh materials and and harold this is cal again and sorry for jumping in share hill had mentioned that little garbled so i i just wanted to invite harold to further comment on the potential to reuse if uh kimoko is reactivated. Yeah, the black pipe that was referred to earlier is HTPE pipe, and it could be pulled into, cut into smaller lengths to be handled, and then refused and used quite happily one ridge over rather than taking it all the way out and having to pack it all the way back in when the time came to hopefully reactivate the Comoko intake yeah and maybe if i can jump in so i think that um one of what i'm hearing is the access for gathering um and and the need to access these resources um in some areas may be impacted by storage of pipes and other equipment. So maybe another recommended amendment could be that if pipes are planned to be reused, that they be stored in a manner that does not affect, you know, safe health and safety on or along the trails or near the trails that are used for these practices. You know, be mindful of that impact here and so chair we'd we'd for for mpl we'd be fine with that recommendation and frankly fine with commissioner hannah's recommendation that we submit a plan to staff that incorporates those science those kinds of guarantees i've got i'm going to a commissioner Wayne. You had your hand up first, and then I'm gonna take Neil and then Michael Wayne. Oh, thank you, Chair. You know that was sort of my question for Kaleo is that in the staff submission, the landowner is listed as MPL so I think that was clear and Kaleo I guess my other question and help me with this is what is the range of public access to this area is it limited to the trail is it a sort of a free-ranging success if you could clarify that and then my last question is uh how far beyond the stream does the commission have the right of governance yeah so those are there's some legal questions in that context and aaron can jump in too um you know and i'll speak based on what i understand and others can jump in um but this road and access up into this area has been open or it could be considered like a public highway in that context context even if it is privately owned by an individual if there is access and undeveloped lands then our job under article 12 section 7 is to make sure that like as mentioned if somebody's gathering lay material in these forests and and there's actions that we can take that are feasible um that we help to support and ensure that that happens um so in that context that's why i'm recommending my recommendation is tied to based on what was presented today in testimony um within our jurisdiction of kapal kai and constitutional analysis and protection that we can make those kinds of recommendations but you within the context of usually the commission's authority jurisdiction is the stream diversion and the diversion works permit, right? And the actual materials used, how it's designed, how it's constructed, et cetera, that's usually within our authority of the water commission, but we have an obligation to the public trust as a whole. So in that context, that recommendation and that potential amendment, I think, is in alignment with our public trust as a whole so in that context that that recommendation and that potential amendment i think is in alignment with our public trust beliefs well kaleo but the suggestion that we have the ability to govern the precise placement and use or you know the treatment of these materials once removed is that covered within our authority yeah i'm not governing that at all all i'm saying is what what i my my proposed recommendation is really just to ensure that if a trail or there's access that's being blocked or health and safety is being impacted by how the materials are stored on the trail, then that is a result, a direct result of us removing the diversion right or the applicant removing the diversion. There's a connection to that so I'm just laying out a recommendation that kind of walks between both the testimony we receive and then our obligation under the code and the constitution. But I don't know if our AGs want to jump in or provide any other guidance on that. But I think that's my recommendation that kind of meets the intent of what we're trying to do and accomplish as a commission is to remove diversions, as submitted and as applied for, but do that in a mindful way. Right. So what does a landowner have any rights to quiet enjoyment of his property? Not under Article 12. Yeah. Again, this is the land is private property in this context, because the issues brought up and posed by the testimony received are related to access. And as Native Hawaiians under Article 12, Section 7, that is something that's protected on undeveloped lands. And because this trail is in existence, that's why i'm kind of recommending that proposed language um it's not saying that you have to start on this specific place in your on your property and you have to do this and you have to do that it's it's it's protecting that right and not necessarily imposing um them on them what and how they should do things on their private property i'm focusing on on the practice that we're trying to um manage that's it okay good thank you very much that's helpful thank you commissioner i have neil and then michael and then aurora neil yes uh i'm rather embarrassed to say that my garage is filled with different things that I think someday I'll reuse. And they just kind of sit there for long periods of time, cluttering the space. And so, likewise, I think, Harold, you might see pieces of pipe. Yeah, we use that someday. But do you have an actual permit or a plan to do so? If it's permitted, then if you get to open something, I can see that, okay, there's an impending reuse and you can efficiently move that piece of equipment or inventory over to that site. But if it's just something that you might reuse at some point, then it could sit there a long long time i think the decision to reactivate kamoko hasn't been made yet um but again it's just a matter of i think the the request of the water commission to get all the pipes out of the stream is something to be met with several mandates of effort versus you know having to take it much further could could create more of a financial burden on the ranch and they're prepared to deal with it this time i'd like to think um the play is um let us you know let them get that taken care of and if anyone's got a concern at that point in time that it hasn't been uh stored suitably and respect respectfully then you know we come back and revisit that but um uh it's just not wanting to create any more burden on the ranch than is necessary but that benefit of to the ranch has got to be looked over the life lifetime of the uh of of the improvement and the and the use of that material. I mean, in my land management experience, had we got to the end of leases and then looked at what at that moment was cost efficient for the landowner to remove or to handle, that would have been really, we would have inherited, and in some cases we did, lot of uh problems on our land and so we permitted granted this was done in a day before there was a water commission but it's currently our authority to permit these structures and in permitting them uh i think we can condition uh what happens when they're removed when they're no longer allowed i'm going to defer to legal counsel on that one that was a that was a delicate punt harold um you know commissioner hannah's i, we work together a lot of time and I hope you know that I'm not trying to avoid anything. And just to be technically legal, perhaps you could have conditioned it when the permit was approved, but it's a different thing to condition it when we're following the commission's order to remove them. So with respect, I don't think that would be accurate, but I've tried to focus on the practical as much as the legal. And I think that there is, I have to defer to Harold on this one, potentially an opportunity to reuse the pipe at Komoku for the reactivation of that diversion, which is something that the commission has been interested in NPL pursuing as well. And so trying to balance those 2 points, I think, is is Harold articulated not burdening the order with with the condition requiring it to remove it completely from the property. I think is both appropriate for your jurisdiction and an appropriate, given the potential to reuse it in conformance with other directions that this Commission has given us. But as I said, I think that your initial suggestion to require us to submit a plan that staff approves, I would accept that. And I would also accept Commissioner of Kaleo, Deputy Director Emanuel's recommendation that any stacking of the pipe not impact the Pa'akai. And I won't debate whether that's within the Commission's authority or not. I don't think we need to. I think that that's a practical thing and a fair thing for us to commit to doing. You're so diplomatic, Cal. Michael, did you wanna ask something and then I'll have Aurora? No, I mean, you make a recommendation. I think we've learned, Chair, the hard way we all do respect. It's really hard to micromanage things on site for Pono Lulu. I support Commissioner Hanna's recommendation. With a plan approved by the staff, the minutes are very clear. I have total trust in the Molokai community that if they're not happy with what they see, they will come back to us. And I truly believe maybe this is a dream molokai ranch is trying to improve their relations with the local community they're going to do the right thing so i i would move to approve item b2 with the amendment that commissioner uh anna's recommend i i don't think we're ready for our motion just yet i'm going to take from aurora to see if there's any other comments aurora um yeah thanks and i um appreciate the dialogues i just have if i may indulge um i guess a story and a question maybe the first question is is this in a conservation district and i know from the middle it is. It is. My story is as a master's researcher many years ago, working on command me. Hell, Lance. when Commissioner Hannis was director of level. I had to pour concrete in bucket. You know there were certain rules that have to be adhered to. If you pour a square foot of concrete, you need a into the ground. I I and for my Phd work I had to apply for to Occl or Cdp. And if we require decommissioning of telescopes on Monica and graduate students to organize heliops to fly out, you know, like 50 pounds, well, actually several thousand pounds of concrete and metal. I think it's well within the possibilities of Molokai properties, but I also understand, you know, you don't want to waste fuel and airtime. And the way I did it was through partnerships. I coordinated with my and I watershed partnership, and I just jumped on one of their heliops, and and it was just one more sling mode. You know, if I could do it as a as a graduate student. I think it's possible. So I I know maybe technically you guys get grandfathered in that you don't need to fly out materials, but sort of in the spirit of stewardship, I would, I guess, encourage there be some attempt to think about how to leave the place better. And I heard Cal say, you know, organizing plans to at least keep it out of the way. But I think, you know know i think there are ways to problem solve and be resourceful to collectively steward molokai not just water but but lands and appreciate steps in that spirit so that was a common knowledge yeah, no, and I like Aurora. And you know I've known couch have chased for a long time, as he's appeared before the land use commission. And he always seemed to find a way to be practical and represent his client well, but also look for a solution. I mean I think under Kapa'a Kai, we as the Water Commission have to balance the interests. So, but I too am optimistic that, you know, we've heard from the community. I think they have provided us ample information that there is traditional customary practices being exercised in this area there are people who have linear connections to the place i've heard of at least a couple of them who've talked about generational connections to the place in my mind those are very um those are very much in line with the kind of information that we should be considering in adopting appropriate mitigation measures. That I believe is well within our purview. Identify what the resources are, what impacts does the project have, and the project in this case is the abandonment and the removal. I see it as appropriate mitigation. The removal of this opala or these pipes, that seems to be very appropriate mitigation for purposes of Kapa'akai. So rather than making that very specific, I think Neil's recommendation is that multi-rent will prepare multi-properties will prepare a plan that's approved by the staff which is probably less onerous than I think where the commission is heading so you should take that as a as a as a gift because I think staff is going to be more reasonable but I would like to see a deadline i don't want to see this coming back a year later and the community saying they haven't removed things so i mean i think you know it is appropriate to put some kind of a reasonable deadline and this i would ask harold and cal when do you think you can get the things out I mean obviously the good weather days what we'd be looking for to get that work done so I mean I would think the time limit of like six months or less would be reasonable and um you know if that doesn't stretch anybody out I think that makes sense and I think you know obviously there's lots of eyes on this um there will be all the way through it being completed so as I think Commissioner Buck mentioned if we don't do a good job um we'll be back in front of you and that's not the way we'll be back in front of you so I think we can move forward with Mr Hannis's uh recommendation and everybody will end up happy in the end that makes sense and you know what hell i suspect that many of the people that testify today they might even be willing to help you that's a good chance i would say this is the beginning of a you know cooperative relationship i mean i have a hunch they would probably expedite this even quicker than six months, but I think six months seems to be reasonable, you are the landowner. But clearly I you know this may be an opportunity to create a bridge with these Community members to work hand in hand with multi properties to you know, to make them whole and bring this place back so with that being said Michael you want to make your motion now I'd rather commissioner Hanna's make the motion okay I'll make that motion and I'll just have this preface uh imagine if we didn't take this stand we'd be sending a signal that that it's okay just take it out of the stream and it's okay that's really not enough and that that could that could lead to you know um kind of the the littering of our of our conservation lands across the state so i'm prepared to make the motion that we adopt the recommendation of staff with the amendment that the removal of pipes and concrete be in accordance with a plan submitted by MPL and approved by Commission staff. Within six months. Within six months. Within six months. I thought you might be saying that you... Yes. Your sentence. Okay. Is there a second to that motion? And by Regarding the declaration of exemption. Oh, yeah. And I think I think, Neil, you would also. And also to accept staff's amendments to I section 2. Oh, yes, yes, yes, related to the declaration of exemption. Right. and who made the second? Oh, my a motion has been made and seconded. Any discussion seeing none all in favor say aye. Any opposed? The motion unanimously passes. I appreciate everybody who participated in this. I appreciate Hal and Chip for Cal for coming, you know, being cooperative on this. And mahalo community. So I guess, are you guys gonna stay for item B3? B3, right? B3. We'll be here chair thank you okay does anybody need to take a break we're just going let's just okay we're going to have good momentum we're going to power through b3 so staff so yeah staff was done in submission um but also ask for a similar amendment be made to v3 um to read the recommendation that staff is proposing and that is that the commission one approved stream diversion works permit sdwp uh 0.5971.4 to advantage stream division works number 866.4 uh to remove pipes and concrete from the unnamed tributary to east favela stream subject to the standard conditions in exhibit five and the special conditions below um one eighth in conformance with the division of forestry and wildlife recommendations incorporated by reference exhibit two the permittees shall one, cease all work activities when stateless water birds are within 100 feet of the project site, and two, minimize the movement of plant or soil material between work sites to prevent the introduction and spread of invasive species. And one B, in conformance with the US Fish and Wildlife Service recommendations incorporated by reference to exhibit four, the permittee shall one implement the plant avoidance and minimization measures identified if any work would occur in the nearby terrestrial areas and to employ practical best management practices for any in-water work and uh staff is asking that the commission consider amending item two to instead read that the commission declared that the project is exempt from ea requirements under hrs chapter 343 and har chapter 11-200.1 and that's it that's that's the recommendation um any com any com questions for staff so chair anticipating we're going to have the same debate over what removal means uh i would suggest we consider this with the same amendment with regarding the removal of pipes and concrete in accordance with a plan supplied by the applicant and approved by within six months uh supplied by the applicant within six months and approved by the commission staff mahalo for that i think that will expedite the discussion any any other questions or comments from the aurora go ahead i do have one and it was that i realized maybe i missed it but i did not receive the earth justice uh late testimony um so images so um that uh i just want it on the record that we're we don't have those pictures but we're still making decisions yeah um any other questions by the commission before I take public comments. Okay, I don't see any hands up any members of the public on item. B. 3. Yes, well, let me ask the applicant first i'm sorry my husband applicant harold or cal do you have any comments you want to add to item b3 chair no comments either is cal or chip neither is fine i'm so sorry chair come on i get it all the time um harold did you have anything you wanted to say specifically on this item no need okay we Okay, we're good, Chair. Mahalo, Mahalo. So Mahesh, go ahead. Thank you, Chair. Aloha, commissioners. Again, I just I just wanted to raise something that came to mind when when Commissioner Kagao Viviani was discussing the conservation status of the lands that MPL owns up there. And it's sort of like, you know, HEPA the conservation status of the lands that MPL owns up there. And it's sort of like, you know, HEPA chapter 343 requires an environmental assessment when there may be significant impacts caused by an action and is triggered in part by presence of these actions on conservation lands and so although if the pipes were cut up um carried closer to their final destination out of the cavella watershed and placed somewhere outside of that area um i think that uh it'd be safe to assume that it would be exempt from chapter 343 if the refuse is simply left in the conservation lands, I think that does raise a question of whether that might cause environmental impacts. And so at that point, I don't actually believe that the project would be exempt from, or at least from the consideration of whether leaving trash in the forest causes environmental impact. So I just wanted to add that, and thank you all again for your time. I appreciate that. Harold or Cal, you have any com... Or what first, let me just ask. Yes, Cal or... Cal, do you have any comments? Sure, Chair, just... Go ahead. Oh, no comments? Sure, Chair, just- Go ahead. Oh, no, so anyway, Chair, I was just gonna say that, you know, the action that's being approved is the removal of the diversion from the stream pursuant to the Commission's prior order. That's the action that's evaluated and exempt, and it's appropriate because that's as far as the Commission's authority goes tell us to leave it and so the exemption declaration is entirely correct I I would if we were considering you know the other action where it has to go and whether it can be stacked for a time in the consultation area while we decide whether to reuse it I would say that would also fall under existing exemption just not the ones before you because that's not the action that you're being asked to consider or whether where your jurisdiction lies that would go to OCCL if it were necessary I think it is accurate to say that because these materials have been there for so long they are grandfathered but all of those are legal discussions and debates that this commission doesn't need to have the action that's proposed was appropriately declared to be exempt by staff, at least recommended to be declared as exempt by staff. And, you know, Mahesh, with deep respect for his abilities as advocate, he doesn't oppose that portion of the exemption, meaning the actual thing that you're considering. And so I don't think that that comment changes the analysis here or changes our support for using the same recommendation that same decision that was followed on item B2 for B3. I believe it's appropriate here as well. that he's going to put the abandoned material on conservation land, then aren't we on notice that we now have to look into whether that's an OCCL violation or whether it requires an OCCL permit now, versus if Hal told us that he's going to remove it from the conservation lands, we wouldn't have that issue, right? I don't know that you have the issue either way, Chair. Obviously, you're not only the chair of this commission, but of the BLNR. And so CCL falls within your jurisdiction. And if we wanted to have a conversation with Michael about whether this is appropriate for conservation land. We could I just don't want this commission hung up on on those discussions. And so I think that the recommendation that we submit a plan within 6 months that to put it on conservation land, we would then ask you for an OCCL consultation. So I think, I think you're absolutely right. So just, you know, versus if you did just place it on conservation land, and then OCCL went and did an investigation so I appreciate your response it depends on what the plan says okay fair enough any other any other public comments testimony aloha yes okay yes Aloha. This is Tara Rojas. And I just wanted to, you know, offer my commentary for the Molokai community that they know what's best for their community. And, you know, just to be mindful that they're, you know, finally be able to get their water back and just to to do what's necessary to right the years are wrong and just to if they need the removal of the pipes and to remove them and I call on my for not knowing the specifics about the conservation putting on on or not, but just really basically listening to, again, the community, listening to the people. So whatever they need to have their water back and in pristine and in clean conditions to please do so. Mahalo. Oh, thank you very much, Tara. Good to hear your voice so do i have anybody else who'd like to provide testimony there is one other on my phone but i think that might have been anti-just okay i don't see anybody nadine no okay so with that um commissioners do i have a motion neil i would uh make the motion that i suggested when you when staff articulated and that is to accept the amendments so made orally by staff as well as the amendment that aligns us with our item b2 that that we have the right to approve a plan the commission staff has a right to approve a plan submitted by mpl within six months and i'll second thank you very much the motion has been made and seconded all in favor say aye. Okay, any opposed? The motion has passed. That is, I don't think we have any other business before the commission. We have completed our agenda items. Schedule, so just a heads up to public and commissioners. Commission meeting. Next commission meeting is scheduled tentatively for May 16th and then the following one june 20th so those two meetings are still on our time to be heard okay that's it thank you very much commissioners this was a very it was a long good meeting so thank you thank you everyone bye-bye thank you thank you. Thank you everyone, bye bye. Thank you, thank you Kel, thank you. Aloha.