 One minute. Okay. Yeah, we'll wait till to on the dot julie keep the running tabs while you're doing it. You'll want that for your mom. I think somebody's got to turn off their mic. Yeah, Kathy. Leave computer audio. Okay. Okay. Are we ready? Miss Yoda, she is the key person for today. Are we ready? You got to wait one minute. So efficient. I was about to be twisted this way because that's what we're used to but I just realized you can explain know but there seems to be intuitively you want to go there modern technology okay Okay. All right. I tell you I'm very lucky. Aloha mai kakou. My name is Dawn Chang. I am the Governor's nominee of the Chair of the Board of Land and Natural Resources and Chair of the Water Commission. I'm humbled and honored to serve as the Water Commission chair, but I'm also very little nervous. This is my first Water Commission hearing, so please be kind to me, but I apologize in advance if I misstep. So please bear with me. This is a January 24, 2023 meeting of the Commission on water resource management it is we are on time 2 p.m and you know my style is we're going to move quickly so we can go home early all right okay so we are holding this meeting as a hybrid meeting some of us are in person in the kalani moku building boardroom in honolulu and others are being are calling in remotely via zoom and others are watching it live on youtube for those here to testify in zoom we will let you into the meeting room when we when we will be hearing your item that you wish to testify on please remember to turn off your youtube when you come when you're you are in the main zoom meeting room or we're going to get an echo like what we were getting from miss ho who didn't turn off her YouTube. Just joking, just joking. When you enter, please be sure to keep your camera off and microphone muted under the commission calls on you for public testimony. We ask the members of the public testifying on agenda items, limit your testimony to three minutes so that we can get through everyone and please remember not to use the chat for any comments because that presents a sunshine issue people may testify via telephone at the number posted online that is correct right okay please let our board secretary ms yoda know your name and what agenda item you wish to testify on so we can call you for that item. You can also email your testimony, and mahalo to many of you who have already submitted testimony. You can email it to kathy, K-A-T-H-Y, dot S, dot Yoda, Y-O-D-A, at hawaii.gov or to dlnr.cwrm at hawaii.gov for all meeting participants i would like to stress the importance of speaking slowly clearly and directly before speaking please state your name and identify yourself for our records i will now read the contested case statement that's in our agenda for those of you who may not have received our agenda i will also read that the commission may go into executive session pursuant to 92-5A4 Hawaii revised statutes in order to consult with its attorney on questions and issues pertaining to the commission's powers, duties, privileges, immunities and liabilities. Materials related to the items on this agenda are available for review at our office at 1151 Punchbowl Street and will be made available at the at the meeting. It's also available online, correct? So in some matters before the Commission, I got the wrong glasses on. Okay, oh there we go. A person may wish to request a contested case hearing. If such a request is made before the Commission's decision, then the Commission will consider the request first before considering the merits of the item before. A person who wants a contested case may also wait until the Commissioners decide the issue, then present the contested case after the decision. It is up to you any request must be made orally by the end of the meeting and followed up in writing within 10 days if no request for a contested case is made the commission will make a decision the department will treat the decision as final and proceed accordingly so with that i'm going to go back to our agenda. I'm going to take a roll call of all the commissioners. Please state your name, and if you are participating remotely, please state whether anyone is in the room with you. Michael Buck, could you start, please? Aloha kakou. My name is Michael Buck, and I am in a room by myself. Thank you. Neil Hannes. Neil Hannes and I'm here at the commission hearing room and I like what you've done with the place. Dr. Aurora Kagawa Viviani. Aloha, Aurora Kagawa Viviani in Manoa in an office by myself. Thank you. Wayne Katayama i'm here in my office alone thank you happy new year to you too um mr paul meyer oh you're on mute, Mr. Meyer. Thank you. Sorry about that. Good afternoon and congratulations. I'm here in my home office and all alone. Thank you. Miss Kathy Ho. Kathleen Ho, I am in my office and I am alone. Thank you very much. Kahlil, could you please introduce your staff? Sure. Thanks, Chair. So in the room with staff, so I don't forget, we'll go left to right. So we have Barrett. He's with our IT division, our IT support. We have Kathy Yoda, who's acting as our commission secretary. Thank you, Kathy. For all you do. We have Neil Fujii with our planning branch. And maybe if you're sorry you're missing from the larger screen so they're here. We have Katie Roth, she's our legal fellow uh aaron dr aaron schrock who's with our stream protection and management branch also next to him um is cody ching uh with our stream protection and management branch and then patrick casey um one of our geologists with our survey branch i think that's it from our water commission staff that's physically in the room and then on zoom we have the head of our groundwater branch ryan imatha um as well as the head of our stream protection and management branch uh dean ueno and i think that is it for the water commission staff that's here today and i would like to recognize that we have deputy attorney general julie chino also remotely aloha everyone okay now i don't think we have um miss yoda do we have any move up items nope all right so the first item on the agenda is item a it is approval of the minutes of november 15 2022. um miss yoda has there been any written testimony on these minutes no that's a new question okay all right um are there any members of the public who wish to testify all right give us one minute, while we get everybody in the room. Okay. There are a number of testifiers too that we do not know. Not for the minutes. Oh, sorry. Yeah, thank you. I'm just going to take any public testimony on the minutes i do want to give the public an opportunity to participate if they have a particular agenda item all right um if there are none do i have a motion to adopt the minutes of november 15 2022. so moved mr meyer second mr katayama um a motion has been made and seconded to adopt the minutes of november 15 2022 all in favor say aye aye and any opposed this is my first water commission meeting so i'm just wondering do i need to do a roll call since this is the first motion you have if you want to chair but it's not required i don't think okay all right so i heard i heard no opposition so the minutes are unanimously approved thank you very much sure we just said that we might send a note to rayanne hyatt who so ably dispatched these duties these past several years and thank her for her service but it feels like we're in good hands with yoda returning re-entered the room oh how can you resist that you must stay thank you indeed though um i appreciate the comment and maybe khalil you can come in yeah okay so next item on the agenda is item b1 and um miss yoda could you bring the testifiers to the zoom room for item b1 staff miss roth are you gonna are you gonna present the submit all right uh aloha chair um item b1 is everyone in Okay. You just set us on your for caffeine. Give me a. We do have a couple people that I have not been able to verify so. For the person identified as Lopez panelists, which item are you here for? See one. and roger okay got it i think we should be good thank you very good thank you very much go ahead aloha chair commissioners katie roth planning program manager with the commission item b1 is approval of chairperson's appointment of marvin kaleo manuel as first deputy to the chairperson of the commission on water resource management Mr. Manuel has served as deputy since January 28 2019 and has been instrumental in moving forward significant decisions by the commission a list of those major accomplishments are in the middle along with background and his resume and I'm happy to answer any questions you may have otherwise staff stands on the middle thank you so very much I appreciate that commissioners do you have any questions for staff commissioners before taking public testimony um miss yoda could you please read for the record the names of the public testimony that we have received to date and their position on the appointment Kevin Johnson in support. Cocoafta Lagrino in support. Leimanu Damate in support. Kaneo Lani Stewart. They're going to orally testify, so I'm not sure. Keikai Ke'ahi. Wayne Chung Tanaka in support. Karen Kanekua. Isaac Moriwaka in support. Karen Kanekua. Isaac Moriwaki in support. Dr. Kamona Beamer. Kapua Sproul in support. Tamara Palton in support. Ashley Aubrey in support. Rihanna Khalili in support, Riana Khalili in support, Mike Atherton in support, Wilani Tanigawa-Lum in support, Eric Meek in support, Jocelyn Dong in support, Devon Haia in support, Pahuk Lindsey Asim in support, Rayann Hyatt in support, support, support, support, support, support, support, support, support, support, support, support, support, support, Kyle Nakan Nailua in support, Kainani Medeiros and Ohana in support, Chris Kobayashi in support. I'm sorry, I'm not going to be able to pronounce this middle name, so Noel Shaw in support, Rebecca Justine Iolani-Soon in support. Charlie Ice opposed. Vicky Hope Sakamine in support. Sarde Freitas in support. Joanna Kaona. Arnein Yamada. Thank you very much, Ms. Shota. I appreciate that um i will now take public testimony on item b1 and how do you do this in the order there's an order there so um the first person that i have is kevin chang and after kevin chang i have kanoy lani stewart so kevin could you please state your name and provide your testimony aloha kevin chang in support of colin manuel uh personally i just want to say that i didn't know his name was marvin i've known him for 20 years. I never thought I'd see any of us doing the kind of work we're doing today. I'm very proud of him as an individual. On behalf of my organization, oh and I like Ryan's guitars, nice guitars, Ryan Imata, but on behalf of my organization, I just wanna say that I think Kaleo has opened like an ear to the folks in the communities we serve to talk about the significance of water to their culture, but not just the culture, but the ecosystems that uphold their culture, the healthy streams, the healthy local eel, the healthy near shore environment where our lemur grows and with that thank you very much kevin um does the commissioners have any questions for the testify okay i see no hands up um next person is hokua Pellegrino? Can we let Hokuau in? Hokuau isn't here, Chair. Okay, I'm sorry. Leimana Damate? Leimana is not here, Chair. She's in the boardroom. Thank you. Aloha, Chair. Aloha. Leimana Damate. I'm the Luna Alakai Executive Director for the hawaii state ahamoku i'd like to say aloha to me we've known each other a long time um i will keep my testimony short because i know i press for time uh we stand on our written testimony and this is with the advice and knowledge of the eight po'o for the eight islands in the pai aina who represent 46 traditional moku and 606 traditional ahupua'a their boundaries are designated by the geography and the topography of the area. So in my testimony there, we noted just four specific things I just wanted to briefly touch on. And the first one is there is a list of the Pai Island that so you have a better idea of the scope of the water commission and their responsibility to the native hawaiian community on the islands so that's just so that you have a better idea of what that is the next thing that i have in the packet is the resolution from the association of hawaiian civic clubs that was passed in november of 2022 at convention in seattle washington there were 67 clubs that were represented the delegates for those clubs and there was a unanimous support for kalaya manuel to continue as the deputy director for the water commission then the third thing i wanted to just remind the commission is of the osha wealth issues and has been going on for the past two three years now and what's really significant about that is that kaleo is the one that looked at the wishes of the people that would ask the developer if they're going to drill a well or if they're going to pull the water from any of our streams or anything they would have to talk to the people the Native Hawaiian communities of that place they would have to look at the impact that that amount of water has been drawn out on the practitioners and I don't only talk about the Mahi'a of the La Bahia but the deep ocean because the water that comes out into the ocean impacts the practices and that's usually not looked at the other important thing about that issue is that mr deputy kaleo has asked that each developer gives back to the watershed that gives us the water that we need and that has never been done before so that is very much appreciated the last thing i wanted to touch on is the kapa'a ka'i'a supreme court law that was passed in the year 2000 and um deputy kalil manuel has made it a point that anyone that is applying for a well a stream diversion or any kind of impact on the public waters of the public trust follows the findings of that conclusions of law of the kapaa'akai supreme court and that has given open the door to our own people in a way that we've all been looking for for many many years so that is happening because of that the hawaii state alhamdul strongly supports kaleo manuel as his deputy director and um we hope to keep them so thank you thank you very much do the commissioners have any questions of mr mate thank you so very much for your testimony um the next person that signed up is kanoy lani stewart is she on the line uh no no chair we do not have uh all right uh the next person oh thank you is uh kekai keahi is he on the line uh no chair okay that's okay the next person is wayne chung tanaka hi good uh oh there we go uh good afternoon uh chair chang members of the water commission wayne uh tanaka testifying on behalf of the Sierra Club of Hawaii. We're testifying in strong support of Deputy Emanuele's continued service on the Water Commission. As you know, I think four years ago, I was testifying in support of his appointment as a member, as a representative of the Office of Water Affairs, and we noted, you know, his extensive experience as a planner with the Department of Flying Homelands, his deep knowledge of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs. And we noted his extensive experience as a planner with the Department of Hawaiian Homelands, his deep knowledge of the state water code and the public trust doctrine, which he garnered through that work, and as well as his personal connection with Hawaiian cultural practices. And numerous other testifiers also noted his solutions-driven approach and how he was a particularly filling candidate and four years later you know i think we can confidently say that our recommendations have borne out um you know almost better than expected uh um you know i just wanted to highlight you know in our testimony and i think in others testimonies you'll hear today uh you know deputy manuel's uh um you know demonstrated ability to help the commission uh really accomplish some truly historic things make some historic progress in the last four years um you know we have interim stream flow standards now for you know for east maui uh for west maui we have water management designation for west maui we have uh updated in stream flow standards for here stream on oahu for waiole stream and koi you know all these things are going to be so helpful and so important for our island's sustainability and the resilience going forward for generations and so um really you know the water code has waited 40 years for someone like uh deputy manuel to to be here and especially with ongoing issues like the red hill crisis with our looming um you know with the climate crisis we really need you know folks like him and and deputy manuel in particular to be able to continue his work as uh the deputy and administrative water commission um and so for those reasons we strongly support and and respectfully but strongly urge your confirmation of his appointment today thank you thank you Mr. Tanaka do the commissioners have any questions for Mr. Tanaka thank you for your testimony the next person I have is Karen Kanekoa. Is she on the line? Oh, I see her. Aloha. Aloha. My name is Karen Kanekoa. I'm from Maui. I live in Honokohau Valley in the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Kaanapali. I'm from the Moku of Ka in Honokohau Valley in the Moku'o of Ka'anapali. I'm testifying today in strong support of the appointment of Kaleo Manuel as first deputy to the invested and committed to responsibly and proactively caring for not only the kumu bai of our pae aina, but also our kai aulu and lahui who depend on our water resources. resources we respect and appreciate and mahalo kaleo for always being transparent and funnel and for always genuinely listening to our concerns and for putting our natural resources first mahalo nui without by we are nothing and we know that this kulana this job requires a special and skilled individual someone who has the knowledge and ability to work effectively and fairly with this community and always putting our natural resources and those who rely on them first and foremost and in my opinion kaleo does all of this and much more so i all do a upon oh yeah oh hello does any of the commissioners have any questions for Ms. Kanekoa? Thank you so much for your testimony. Mahalo. The next person that signed up is Isaac Mariwaki. Here. Oh, I'm sorry. In person. Please take a seat. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chair Allen. Good afternoon. Chang. Chang, sorry. And members of the commission, Happy New everybody nice seeing you this year and here's to a good 2023. isaac moriwaki for earth justice and i'll keep this short since we all know that kaleo needs to get back to work and also because i'm sure you don't need any encouragement reminder of how he's objectively truly the best choice for this job. All these supporters these well wishers, we see how with Cleo as deputy commission has stepped up his commitment and its progress in fully and fulfilling its public trust's kuleana. Of course, credit should go to the commissioners themselves and all the commissions dedicated and hardworking staff, but today is Kaleo's day. So as a decades long advocate for the public trust and an admirer of true public servants, I'm glad that the commission is keeping the band together here with Kaleo continuing under the new administration. He's worked hard over the years to grow into this role and we all need him to help lead the commission in following through on the hard work ahead. So mahalo Kaleo and mahalo commissioners for voting to confirm does the commissioners have any questions for Mr. Moriwaki thank you so much for your testimony thank you the next person is Dr. Kamana Mai Kalani-Beamer. I'm a former eight-year two-term water commissioner, served to the best of my abilities with many of you here in this room. And a pleasure to meet you, Chair, and appreciate the work that everyone is here in this room and a pleasure to meet you chair and appreciate the work that everyone is doing in this capacity. I'm here just to strongly support with the utmost confidence the appointment of Kaleo to continue as deputy. I think it's critical to just continue the momentum that he's been able to achieve. Kaleo is one of the best facilitators I've known. As we all know, our positive and important role of this commission is to have a diversity of opinion and interests, and Kaleo does a fantastic job facilitating all of that. I can go over numerous cases and decisions where I felt his leadership was pivotal. To be honest, the last day of my term on the commission, when we released the Nawa'iha decision, Kaleo and I were on the phone multiple times. Maybe some of us remember there were some challenges or errors in that final decision and order, and Kaleo was just on it through that whole process. And so I just want to firmly give my support for his leadership and want to thank your administration for continuing and seeing his service and where it can take us and water in the future for Hawaii. Happy to take any questions. Thank you very much. Do the commissioners have any questions? Mr. Beamer, thank you for your service on the commission as well. Mahalo. thank you. The last person who signed up is Kapua Sproat. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha Chair Chang, commissioners for the record. I'm Kapua Sproat and I'm testifying today in strong support of agenda item B1 like many of you I wear a lot of different hats in our community and in that capacity I've had the great privilege of working closely with Deputy Director Manuel on a number of issues impacting many different islands across our paeina but today I am here in my personal capacity. I have been fortunate to have been appearing before this commission since the 1990s. Yes, I am that old. And I was trying to recall actually how many deputies I had worked with over the years from the Nel Nishioka and Yvonne Izu to Ken Karahara and more, including I think more recently Jeff Pearson and then Kaleo. And for me, Kaleo stands out as the very best, I think for all of the reasons that you've already seen detailed in the voluminous written testimony, as well as the people who have already appeared today. And my voice joins the chorus of others who are deeply grateful that you, Chair Chang, have nominated Deputy Director Manuel to continue the important work of this commission. Like Wayne Tanaka, I was also at your meeting four years ago supporting Deputy Director Manuel's first term, and I'm excited to be back here again to support him continuing. And as someone who tracks water issues closely, I've really scrutinized his work over the last four years and have been impressed not simply with his grasp of the issues but by his integrity and aloha and how as a process person he brings so much to this commission I think as as former commissioner Beamer just pointed out but you know you've already heard a lot from folks and as Isaac said we need him to get back to work so I had just a couple things that I wanted to highlight in his his first term, he implemented some important changes. I think having issues presented for discussion at one commission meeting and then decision making at a second has really helped the commission and all affected stakeholders be able to engage in meaningful discussion without, you know, the fear of contested case hearing kind of hanging over everything. I also got to work closely with him on a number of issues one example is you know our native wine and environmental rights clinic supported the waiole valley tarahui with a number of challenges to restore their kalo and their manaway this was incredibly important work and incredibly complicated work i mean you folks know you were we were working side by side but i think it was i cannot say enough about how important kaleo's role was as a facilitator to bring together all the different entities not just within commission staff aaron and others but also folks throughout dlnr and that was really crucial in helping us to leverage resources and to make meaningful changes not just before with what happened before this commission but also from a larger policy perspective so that other color farmers don't have to um have these issues so you know others have also mentioned what an important bridge he's been and how now we can have meaningful two-way discussion you know not just one-way sort of directives um kalel has also had the courage to uphold the law and the commission's processes, and that has garnered some grousing, but I think as an attorney, I think that that better protects this commission and has reduced the number of appeals that we've seen during his term, at least compared to others. So I could go on and on, but suffice it to say, I think you see, I strongly support his reappointment, and I want to urge all of you folks to vote and support. Thank you so much. And I'm happy to take any questions you may have. Mahalo, appreciate the testimony. Does the commissioners have any questions for Ms. Sproat? Mahalo, good to see you. Aloha. Are there any other members of the public that would like to provide testimony? Yes, please come on up. And then Chair, there's two others that are trying and the executive director of foundation and i have had the privilege of meeting Kaleo as a young undergraduate at the University of Hawaii and throughout his graduate studies at UH Manoa. He took several of my classes and he also joined Halao. So he Uniki in 2017 as a Ho'opaa and an Ola'awa. I've never been so proud of him. I think over the past four years and also watching him grow under DHHL and he led our Pai'i board through an amazing planning process to develop our Pai'i strategic plan. And watching him facilitate those meetings and watching him in the community. I know that he has done such amazing work in the last four years with his team here. And I thank the team here, his staff for the support that they give to Kaleo because a leader can only lead if you have people and you have staff that really strongly support the vision and the fact that he's holding us all responsible not just the people at the commission but to the laws that were put in place to help to preserve our natural and cultural resources and water is our most valuable resource so as um i know that he takes this very seriously and his kuleana to support and and abide by and hold up the the water commission standards and the laws of our um our aina is going to be something that he takes very seriously and so he also knows that he has to answer his school but yeah so thank you very much i mean i have such strong support for and i've gotten to you know gotten to know him and he's just going to be super for you he already is mahalo for that any questions hi everybody thank you so much i have are there other members of the better yes lani stewart is logged in and we also have uh joanne uh kona and kalamaehu okay kunoi lani please go ahead. Can you hear me? Yes. Aloha. Aloha. O wau kei o Kanoelani Stewart no Lahaina mai au. My name is Kanoe. I come from Lahaina, Maui. I just am testifying in strong support of Kaleo Manuel to be reappointed to his position as deputy and strong kakou to all of the commissioners of of Sea Worm um we definitely had um we've seen him in Lahaina quite a few times um especially the past year I think last spring was when he came out to facilitate a public meeting with all of us and I just really want to commend the awesome work that he did navigating the crowd that we had as he was informing us about the water designation in Lahaina and not pushing any kind of agenda on us but definitely just showing reasons why designation was important and how it could only support the future of Lahaina and how it can help our community as well. And so just wanted to quickly testify and show my k훮kou, yes, as a community member of Lahaina for K훮le'o-Manua. Mahalo nui. Mahalo for your testimony. Are there any questions of Ms. Stewart? Mahalo. Aloha. We also have in Joanne Kauna. Oh, okay. Joanne, is it Kona? Please go ahead. Okay. My video is saying that the host disabled it. Can you hear me though? We can hear you. Okay. There we go. Oh, there you go. Aloha, commissioners. My name is Joanne Kaona. I'm the secretary for the Waiole Valley Terahui fourth generation kalo farmer from Hawaii. Our organization works in partnership with you and your staff including Kaleo to amend the IIFS for Waiole stream in spring of 2021. Our testimony today is in strong support of agenda item b1, and I'm here on behalf of our Hule of farmers to support Kaleo because he has supported us after a very long road starting with the 2018 flood. Tons of application, exemptions, studies, consultations, time as alleged, professional easement last year chair case confirmed that we are power with the water leasing process and can focus all of our efforts back to restoring our farms and we have life in waiole valley it took four years but it felt like a lifetime and we never would have gone here without the help and support of kalealeo and Erin and I'm not just talking about the IIFS. Kaleo was an important liaison with the land division and DLNR more generally. He was a bridge to ensure clear and transparent communication in a process that was completely confusing for us as hollow farmers and he even came to Waiole to see firsthand the waters and other resources we were talking about. And together with Aaron was key regarding the installation of our gauge, so we can better monitor both streamflow and the water use in our awai. This is a wonderful example of agency and community working together. And it's just one example here on Hawaii and I'm sure there are many more across Hawaii so please vote to confirm him mahalo mahalo for your testimony do the commissioners have any questions okay okay hearing none thank you so much for your testimony there's another person is it uh sorry chair also Eric need Eric Lee. Okay, thank you, Eric Mead. Yes, Hello, my name is Eric Mead. I'm a law student at the William S. Richmond School of Law, and given the overwhelming and powerful support already provided, i'll keep this really short. I'm in strong support of B. one, and I will stand on my written testimony though i also wanted to thank kaleo and the commission for the ability to testify via zoom which makes access to these meetings and information much more open to the people who usually have to travel to honolulu thank you mahalo for your testimony does anybody have any questions of mr mead thank you so much for your testimony and yes that, that is the power of Zoom. Thank you. Are there any other testifiers? Sure, last is Kalama'ehu. Oh, Kalama'ehu. Is that a Kalama'ehu? Please. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Aloha. Manuel. We just wanted to say we've had a lot of positive and very positive and risk and very respectful and engagement with Deputy Director Manuel. We had the opportunity while we were residents of the Honokoha Valley here in West Maui to be able to take a hike up the valley and just to sort of see the state of the way up there as we're renegotiating the IFS and beginning the conversation in terms of the designation of the West Side in Maui. I think that it speaks volume when you have a public service, when you have somebody in the deputy director's position able to come and walk with community in their place to sort of really sort of see what the historical impacts and what other things like development and other sort of and other sort of interests have on Aina and on these resources and so I would like to see I would like to see at least one more term from from a fellow kanaka and somebody who is truly dedicated to this resource to our communities to our ohana and hopefully and I think that his work and the work that we can do together as a lahui will benefit the little ones like this and hopefully, and hopefully, Deputy Director Manuel, if the boy here needs one job, I hope you can give him one. But just to keep it brief, diwa mahalo and just, and I say this in full trust that you will, that you will work this next, that you will do your best and to awama your kuleana through this next term to ensure the security and the integrity of vai for all of us as Hawai'i. O leakane, mahalo nui. Oh, mahalo, appreciate the testimony. The commissioners have any questions for Kalama'ehu? Okay, thank you. Are there any other? Chair, there is one more person that I'll let in. I'm not sure they haven't identified themselves, but all right. I mean, in now, Kevin Kevin. Okay, let's kick. I okay, please have to unmute and... I think he just connected to his audio, so... Dean, maybe you can request to unmute or request to turn on camera. Mr. Can you unmute or, or turn on your visual? Ask to unmute and ask to start video. Oh, coming coming. Now you just have to unmute. Oh, is my turn already? Yeah. Okay, Bronwyn, go ahead. I took that lady and I'm sorry. No, no, please go ahead. This is for Khalil? Yes. Oh. Well, I want to just say I want to support the pick, the picking of Khalil for the position. I met him way back before he even got into with the state and he has always been honest and truthful. Something that in my experience is somewhat rare in government nowadays. Even when it's things that I don't wanna hear, he tells it to me. And I just wanna say I support Kaleo as the pick. And yeah, and I hope you guys pick him. Thank you. All right. Thank you, Keahi. That was Keikai. Keikai. Dean, do we have anybody else? does it does the do the commissioners have any questions for um okay mahalo um any other no one else in the waiting room here okay anybody else in the room come on come up jonathan well how am i my name is jonathan likeke shoyer Jonathan Lee KK Schoer for the record I often appear before you on behalf of various entities but I am here today solely on my own behalf and like I believe Professor Sproat and Mr Moriwaki I'm part of the folks who who've been here for a couple three decades already and so not only was I here when Kaleo was last appointed I was also here when the previous deputy was appointed and the previous deputy and then at one point I was actually in that seat and the person before that and so I think I the thing I just want to share other than to k훮kou and echo the long support that we've heard today for K훮le'o is how different it is. With respect to those who have come before, commissioners and deputies, this has been a body that has been deeply hostile to local communities and Hawaiian communities. The fact that you have all these voices coming from across the pipeline, saying, hey, we actually recognize what you do. And we support what you do. And we don't always agree with what you do. But we have a connection now. I think bears very well for the heavy, complex and difficult work of the next four years. Not everybody has been happy during Kaleo's time, but I think that's also because it's not that conflict didn't exist before, but it was suppressed. Voices were suppressed, issues were suppressed, and we know what happens when that happens for too long. So by bringing up a process where many entities now feel at least they have the opportunity to come before this really important board and have a fair hearing will make our lives and Hawaii so much better. Mahalo nui. Mahalo for your thoughtful comments. Do any of the commissioners have any questions of Jonathan? Okay, seeing none, thank you very much for your testimony. Anyone else in the audience here would like to provide testimony? Okay. I would like to provide testimony? Okay. I would like to just say mahalo to all of those who have provided written and oral testimony. It is very clear, I think Jonathan very aptly stated it, that things have changed. It's nice to see these voices at the table. I appreciated reading through all of the testimony that they were individualized based upon a personal experience. And I think that really matters. So I appreciated everybody that took the time to submit testimony for our consideration. So thank you again so with that um do the commissioners i'm going to close public testimony do the commissioner well do i have a call for the motion mike's got his hand up and i don't have it too okay mike mike so mike are you your motion is to approve the chairperson's um recommendation no chair if we could give the commissioners a chance to talk story about what we think about kaleo it would be helpful yeah can we can we do this yeah mike can we do the motion first and then go into discussion where you can do that okay i i i i move that cleo manuel be reappointed as the water deputy okay second all right now let's go into discussion go ahead mike okay very quickly i was so happy to hear that claire was coming back incoming chair if you you had anything to do with that it was a very wise move i'm so happy for the Water Commission because Kaleo has done an unbelievable job in managing the Water Commission. I am so happy for the state of Hawaii. I mean, we've heard a lot of descriptions of the last four years as historic. You know, we've had an opportunity, maybe for the first time, to really implement the water code over large regional areas. And it's not easy, it's an aspirational water code, but Kaleo, I'm so happy for the state of Hawaii that Kaleo is back. And then finally, I am so happy for Kaleo himself. He is a unique individual with knowledge, skills, and ability, and he has an opportunity to be in a position which he's demonstrated over the next four years to make a positive impact and those are experiences and memories that he will always cherish so i'm incredibly happy for kaleo as well and i'm 100 in support of his reappointment thank you thank you very much mr buck neil yes uh first of all i want to thank the testifiers who came forward took time from your day to to be here and be a part of the process and for all that you uh shared in regard to largely in support of kalel uh i acknowledge the testimony of charlie ice uh in opposition and appreciate charlie's courage steps, stepping forward and extending his views. And we have certainly a strong upwelling of support from our Hawaiian community and grassroots of our supporters of our culture and our environment. But I also appreciated the testimony Mike Atherton as a developer, who's trying to restore agriculture and other uses in a balanced way. And I think that his testimony was real key and important element of support for your continuation in this position. When I first met, I met Kaleo a long time ago, but when he first came into this position, I met with him in his office and we talk about this all the time. And I saw this number of halavai on the on his whiteboard and it was the number of meetings he would have in his term of this commission and in a recognition that everyone that passed without productive outcome was a lost opportunity and that is a profoundly important attribute of a public servant who's trying to work especially in this area where so much needs to be done for such a vital resource so that attitude i think was uh was telltale and it's one thing to want to get work done it's another thing to get the work done and the unprecedented results that we've seen in in submittal chair as well as in other testimony, I think, testifies to the fact that it's not only a matter of wishing things can happen but actually an ear to people who didn't feel like they had one before and we've provided opportunities to really kind of work out the differences so that we have a framework for how to move forward not only to protect the resource not only perpetuate the culture but also to provide for development of agricultural or other urban uses in a way that's very compatible with those goals and outcomes that's balance and i think it's important duty of this this uh this uh commission i think the team is not only kaleo but this team is doing a remarkable job in in achieving that and i recognize that as a new administration steps in there's a desire to kind of eagerly bring your team in and i appreciate that governor green has uh recognized that some members of the team that came before were really valuable attributes uh and other really deserve recognition for what they've done in the past and are going to be valuable in his administration going forward in continuing progress and achieving greater results so for these reasons i've seconded the motion and uh eagerly await uh not only the approval of this motion but also the months ahead and i think about having about a year and a half work we've done wow mahalo for that new um commissioners yes um i just wanted to add in um it's with great relief that i heard um deputy manual is going to be reappointed and would have a second chance um sorry i should have script this but i i'm the newest person on the commission and it was um it was a very eye-opening experience to realize how much of the work of this commission really happens between the meetings and so that's the deputy and staff working together to really organize information and provide it to us, so we can make informed decisions. With that, as testifier, the post broke, pointed out the informational briefs that precede decision making have been really helpful. They're super dense it's helpful to have that lead time to really wrap our brains around these complicated issues. And we had the I had the opportunity I don't know if this is normal, but to get out to East Molly, for instance, to walk and really see these areas that we're making some decisions on. We can't always go out there it's hard logistically with sunshine laws. But you know it was facilitated by deputy and staff and i've seen him allow his staff to take lead on different issues aaron on streams ryan imanta on red hill and really take the long view on many things including we've had conversations about capacity building we all know seaworm doesn't have enough staff and money to do all that it should and wants to do. So how do we take the long view? And so that's somebody not looking at a four-year term, but really with the long-term kind of intergenerational interests in mind. And so alongside with that, we've had conversations about climate change. How do we better think about climate change in the context of our decision-making than that played into Lahaina. So there i'm relieved that we can continue the work because these are challenging but um under coleos as people have noted his facilitation skills um are impressive and humbling um i don't know how to learn those or how to create more people who have those skills who can really leverage them in public service. It's not easy to be an agent of the State, especially working in community where there's been so much distrust. So I really respect the report he's built and especially as I was on the Red Hill permitted interaction group have seen what happens when we break trust with institutions and how harmful that is for really taking care of our water so um with that appreciate the stamina that you you will bring you bring you will find in the coming years and and looking forward to um I fully support your nomination and I'm looking forward to continuing the important work ahead and complicated work mahalo aurora um is it we katayama yes please go ahead all right thank you chair and i think uh kalio's accomplishments over his tenure as deputy has been well documented and described by oral testimony as well as written testimony. And for me, I think this is an interesting unique situation, and if you could provide some historical perspective, my first question is um i don't think any agency in the state other than the water commission has a deputy and the chair to be confirmed by two different bodies and i was wondering you know how does the relationship work with the chair being temporary and the department deputy being confirmed, should that not run in tandem. But let's put that aside for the moment. And I think it's a very powerful situation that we have a resident deputy that's being nominated again. And I guess Mr. Ice's testimony has that been vetted and to see if the internal mechanisms of the department have been working as intended. And I don't know if that was ever articulated in the narrative that was presented as well as the resume I you know all the big stuff for the future Outlook I agree with because I was there for most of it but also we do have a fiduciary responsibility to mandate things that we need to interface with the public in terms of well permits or other kinds of administrative things so i was wondering has that been vetted that's sort of my you know sort of big areas that do we need to talk about it a little more? Oh, Commissioner, they are all a question. And as I first off, I just want to say mahalo to the community that has come to support my nomination and as well as the commissioners and staff that are here. And I think the question is tied to that um on in terms of internal management and staff management and resources um you know i've i've been i i know what it's like to come in as staff i used to work for department of wine homelands as staff and the changes in administration every four years, sometimes shorter if they don't last. And so continuity is really important, and so I will say in my defense, you know I've always come in working within the systems that have been created. but constantly asking questions about efficiency and how can we do things smarter with less resources um take advantage of opportunities when we see them uh so a lot of the internal dialogues that we have with staff and i'm hopefully eventually some of them will talk to you one-on-one um or have the freedom to do that right right? And I encourage staff to share their thoughts with me and we've constantly had great conversations, I believe. We don't always agree, but I'm always willing to listen to staff and look at ways that we can improve our systems. And so with that said, you know, some of the criticism in Mr. Ice's letter, I was unaware of um we process or i process permits well construction compensation permits as they're presented to me um i take every signature i put on a piece of paper very very seriously and most of my staff can attest to that they probably get things sent back to them if there's even just a typo because I want it to be as perfect as it can be. That's the type of person I am and the commitment to quality that I'm committed to. So, you know, I worked with his supervisor and his supervisor would work with me. And so we worked through some of the issues especially related to construction pump installation permits uh that we've reviewed so um again my commitment is just to be as good as i can uh be an open door for staff to work with and you know as my kumu talked about in her running her halal um you as a leader aren't as good as your team. And I believe in every single one of my team members and the staff that are here today, because I cannot lead them. They really support me. And actually I support them. I do believe I support them. I've uplifted them. A lot of the credit that's been given to me is actually credit that should be given to them because a lot of the initiatives and the work that's been presented, they've been working on but really have never gotten to the agenda or have never been prioritized um and so that's just my response to commissioner katayama your question about a review and analysis of time frames um we were in the middle of a pandemic. I just want to highlight that. I got caught with that one. So a lot of the time for review and processing was not only potentially stalled because of, you know, the pandemic. Staff had retired. Other agencies that have to do reviews, for example, Department of Health or SHPD, also established new processes that we had to work through and navigate through so um while some of the numbers may not line up i we do have data and statistics on permits process etc through my four years uh i i think a lot of it was just situation based and timing okay appreciate that mr katayama oh no thank you kaleo i mean i guess in going through this process our fiduciary or i believe my fiduciary responsibility is to cover all the bases and you know all the testimony and support i think was well deserved mahalo and i appreciate the question and then um hopefully item c2 will also highlight some of the the limits of of our resources and the budget and staff that we do have thank you thank you anything else mr katayama no i'm fine thank you chair thank you very much um mr meyer Mr. Meyer, would you like to share any words? Thank you. Yeah, I do have a concern. And the concern really is that over many years, I've boss the director and of course the deputy director or direct deputies um to be of one mind and be pulling in the same direction and that usually implies that folks have worked together for some time and they've had adequate time and effort devoted to conforming their goals and objectives for the organization and the mission and this is a situation where it appears to me that we haven't had that time unfortunately and that's the nature of the beast perhaps uh but we don't even know for example if the if the uh chair's position is final uh if if that's correct and I'm concerned about that this is something that should be discussed in executive session by the way but uh that's a concern because uh the chair and the deputy should be able to finish each other's sentences they should have complete agreement they should really conform the concepts of goals and directions and in a small organization a relatively small organization uh like the commission uh that is a big task and and shortfalls in budget and in staffing that's something that's really critical it's critical to achieving the correct objectives for the people of Hawaii to filling our obligations under the water code and I'm just concerned that we haven't had the time to for that conformance and unity of goals and missions and thoughts to take place um and uh i hope it doesn't appear that there are differences of opinion or uh things uh don't get done as efficiently as is possible because that would be unfortunate and again this is something that we should have talked about in an executive session i really think that we need to make use of that vehicle more often in situations like this that being said i admire kaleo i admire his work and he certainly got a lot of energy and i appreciate and admire that. Thank you very much. Thank you very much, Mr. Meyer. Kathy Hull. Did we lose you? Yeah, thank you. Thank you. I've only been sitting as a commissioner for about 18 months, and in that time that I've worked with Kaleo, I must say he has a lot of energy and positive energy. He is committed to the mission of the commission, and that is to protect and sustain our resources and our precious water, which I am also committed to. We have some disagreements. We've talked about them. We have we will continue to work towards the betterment of our state. And I I I'm pleased that he has been nominated and fully support his nomination. Thank you very much, Kathy. I appreciate the comments. I just have a few comments. And I appreciated both Mr. Katayama and Mr. Meyer's comments. You know, I will tell you, this is a historic moment for us. One that the governor has had confidence in nominating me as the first native Hawaiian woman with a team Laura Ka'akua as the first as a first deputy and Kalea Manuel as the deputy for the water commission I think it is a statement about the governor's commitment and his recognition of sensitivity to the Hawaiian community and that we do bring that to a department that is so cr that touches and concerns every single person whether you live here or whether you visit but most particularly native Hawaiians and you will find that I am a process person. There are people that are far smarter than me on substance, but I am a process person who believes in providing a safe venue and platform for genuine community engagement. And I have appreciated the good work of Kaleo as articulated by many of you who have provided testimony that, you know, and sometimes I call it the pendulum swings a bit, and the pendulum has swung a bit where we are creating a platform for voices that have historically not been heard and it is but those people who have probably been the most affected by decisions of the water commission and other agencies so both in dll and at the water commission it a vehicle to hear community voices and concerns. We may not all have the same decision, but we're going to try very hard to create a place for those voices to be heard. You know. It is. For me. Our first duty is to the mission of the water code. We're not here to necessarily advocate, but it is to ensure that the code is being upheld, not only in the letter of the law, but the spirit of the law. What was it intended to do? With respect to sort of my style of management, I say I am much too makule, too old to micromanage. But it is to provide the team, the staff, with the tools for them to be successful, whether it's resources, capacity, or funding. But it's also to provide good input as we all make informed decisions we are going to do a lot of internal coordinations to Mr Meyer Mr takayama's comments we're going to speak very candidly within these walls all the divisions will speak and we have numerous divisions that don't necessarily have the same mission but when we leave dlanar we better have one voice but that means that we're going to have a lot of hard discussions internally and um and not everybody agrees with me and i don't agree with everybody but we're going to create a an environment where people can feel like they have the ability to say what they have to say. And you're right, I am not confirmed. I am, so I am here, I am the interim appointee, subject to Senate confirmation. And I don't know how that's all going to go, but during the time that I've got here and and i think visions for the implementation of the water code we may not all agree on how we get there but i think we want to get to the right place so i am optimistic that with the water commission as a collective body and the good guidance by staff we will be able to continue the good work that's already been instituted by the previous commissioners and the chairpersons i know i have big shoes to fill with suzanne case but i would do the best that i can i am extremely grateful that kaleo has come back to return that is the governor's decision to reappoint kaleo but i think he has also heard a lot of the people in the community so with that being said mahalo um i'm going to call for the question a motion has been made by commissioner buck seconded by commissioner panis to approve the recommendation by the chair person to appoint kaleo manuel as the deputy director of the water commission um all in favor please say aye aye aye aye let's take a roll call vote for this one to make sure we got on the record a unanimous vote so um miss yoda could you Michael Buck. Aye. Neil Hammets. Aye. Aurora Viviani. Aye. Wayne Katayama. Aye. Paul Meyer. Aye. Jackie Cole. Aye. Chair. Aye. all aye chair aye the motion has been made second ted unanimously approved congratulations mahalo to all of those who are here today and those on the zoom and kaleo for your willingness to serve another for you hello my whiteboard is empty so now i can put that number on that whiteboard so i appreciate the confidence and again thank you to um all of the support from community that are here and online as well as staff mahalo for all that that you do and this commission look forward to another four years so here we go mahalo so we're going to move on to our agenda item c1 item c1 which is a non-action item it is a an update from the department of health on the red hill response and remediation is that you miss kathy hall that is thank you very much here and members of the commission and um the public what i'm going to do now is um turn it over to a familiar face of the commissioners um joanna sito is going to lead us through the updates with other members of our team joanna would you introduce the other members of our team, please, and then take it away. Thank you. Thank you. Sorry, Joanna, if you can give a few seconds. We have everybody. Oh, yeah, I'm sorry. Yes. Dean, could you let the members of the public that are here for this item? Yes, Chair. Everybody's coming in. We have one more person. Thank you so much thank you beam let me know when all set okay uh go ahead joanna. Thank you. Thank you. Good afternoon, Commissioners. It's nice to be on the other side of the table. We are going to go through what we have on our Red Hill water information webpage, and just give you a brief update on the information that is happening, the situation at Red Hill. So based on the information that is happening and the situation at Red Hill. So based on the layout of the information page, we're going to start with the AFFF, Aqueous Film Forming Fo 1, 4, 3, 8 with Liz Galvez. We will continue with PFAS and the environmental action levels with Roger Brewer, and then the department's emergency order with Kelly Ann Lee, our Red Hill project coordinator, and Kathy commissioner and our deputy director then we will follow that with the drinking water long-term monitoring update with Dennis Lopez safe drinking water branch chief and then aquifer monitoring and recovery with Phoenix Grange of the here office and completing that will be myself reporting on the Red Hill shaft filtration and discharge into Halawa Stream. So we will start with Liz Galvez of the HEAR office on-scene coordinator. Okay, I don't see her. Roger, do you have this with you? Joanna Liz was in the waiting room for a time, and then she dropped off. Oh, okay. I don't know where she is. Okay, I can text her and either bring her in here or have her re-login. Okay. If you don't mind, we can move to... I can talk about the emergency order and the consent decree. Kellyanne, are you, while we wait, Kellyanne, are you available? I can take a five minute break. We could do that too. You know, I just feel like I could take a five minute break. All right. OK. Five minute recess, five minute recess. Thank you. Thanks, Karen. I'm gonna break now. I said I was waiting for an hour. I know. Just saying. Okay. you you you you you you you you you you you you All right. All right. So, very good Kathy Department of Health. Is it. Jenna. You guys is is has been let in the from the waiting room. The same time. Administrative. Your YouTube Susan. Thank you everybody we have. Now we have Liz Galvez of the Hazard Evaluation and Emergency Response Office State On-Scene Coordinator to present the current information for the AFFF here incident. Thank you, Liz. Liz Galvez Hi, good afternoon, everybody. My name is Liz Galvez and as Joanna mentioned I'm a State On-Sea Coordinator and what that means is I deal with chemical and oil spill So I have been asked to talk about the AFFF release, and this was at the Red Hill, and it happened at at 6, and 1 o'clock the navy reported that they had a worker that discovered a release so at about 2 38 the navy notified our office that approximately 1100 gallons of aqueous film forming foam or AFFF concentrate was released in the tunnel and it impacted areas such as Addit 6 itself. It went out of Addit 6 onto the asphalt and down the soil area and also a culvert. So my co-worker and I went to the scene and we got there at approximately 3 30 in the afternoon and what we had discussed with the Navy on scene coordinator that was present on site was to make sure that they delineated the spill that they immediately remove the AFFF impacted media. And at that time you know they could use either an excavator or hand digging but um and we also while that was going on we requested for epa's technical assistance i was on the phone with them at the time i knew who was on duty so i was in constant communication with a and before that night was over, Department of Health also requested a response action plan and a written sampling plan for soil and groundwater, knowing the importance of, and the gravity of the AFFF that was released. So we've been doing that. Department of Health has been overseeing the cleanup actions, the cleanup response that has been going on at Red Hill. And we did receive the emergency response sampling plan for soil and groundwater. We received that on the 30th and the Navy and Department of Health, and also with epa's assistance you know came to an agreement with the sampling plan for soil and groundwater and we also requested for a waste management and disposal plan, what we wanted to ensure was that the waste was handled properly and the disposal can be tracked from cradle to grave. And in addition, we wanted to make sure that there is a decontamination plan for added six. So along those lines, the Department of Health issued a notice of interest requesting for those things. In addition, we had also, you know, wanted to make sure that they provide us with other AFFF releases that had happened in the past and to ensure that the cleanup is done properly as part of our mandate the department is also um you know expected to receive from the navy a 30-day written follow-up and that we received. So the first part of the cleanup was to do exterior excavation. And the initial excavation is complete. They had collected approximately 150 cubic yards, I believe, and that is currently stored offsite, awaiting for analytical results and how to dispose of it and where to dispose of it. On December 14th, we had approved a temporary cap of asphalt to prevent potential contamination from spreading. And this action, you know, reduces the risk to public health and the environment. As the operations were ongoing for 24-7, you know, we were there and we could clearly observe the rains, the rains, even if it's just sprinkles, it would collect in those plastic covered excavated areas. So upon further discussion with the Navy, it was best that they temporarily cap it, knowing that depending on the sampling results that more work needs to be done and they are prepared to do the excavation. Sampling has also been done for both soil and groundwater. Sampling for groundwater continues. They do it weekly for the wells. We are awaiting for validated data and then the results, you know, we will be discussing that with EPA and with the Navy. Are there any questions at this point? Thank you. Thank you. Joanna, did you have any questions for Ms. Valdez? Anyone? Commissioners? All right. Joanna, your next your next staff. Yes, Roger Brewer, State Risk Manager. I think that's the title he provided yesterday. Go ahead, Roger, turn your camera on, and you have a camera, Roger? So Roger, we can't a question for Liz Galvez. If it's possible. Go ahead, Aurora. Aurora Cagallo-Viviani. I just had a question. I got a little bit confused. So have you received those plans for response plan, sampling plan, waste management and disposal plans? Yes, we have received those and they are posted online at our website. Okay. And then, you know, have you approved them? I mean, you've received them. Have they met DOH's expectations and needs? It had undergone iterations. And as you know, with emergency response, you know, those plans can change depending on the situation. But the latest one that is posted, I believe, is the current one. And with the waste disposal plan, it's also posted on our website. Department of Health had provided comments, and we'll be working with them. But know that in the meantime, you know, that waste has not gone anywhere. Thank you. Joanna, is Roger ready? He is restarting. Okay. There we go. Thank you, Dean. Okay, Roger. Go ahead. Are you able to turn your camera on? My camera's not working, but can you hear me now? At least you can hear me now. Go ahead. Yes, we can hear you. Okay. So I just joined, so I haven't heard the questions that were going. There were no questions regarding PFAS EALs, but if you could give a short introduction of what your EALs are. For the PFAS compounds? Yes, please. Okay. Yeah, so my name is Roger Brewer. I'm a senior scientist with the Department of Health for most of the past 30 years. One of my job tasks is to compile toxicity information for different compounds, working with toxicologists and develop action levels as we call them for different compounds in drinking water and so on and such. EPA has posted drinking water screening levels for three or four, maybe five PFAS by now. We've been doing other studies around Hawaii. I know we need a lot more than that so i've been talking with multiple states around the u.s compiling information they have as well as uscpa and we have drinking water action levels now for about 19 almost 20 compound of these compounds and we're still working with other agencies to continue compiling data. So they mostly reflect that information EPA has published, but again, that's limited. We're working with other states. I give presentations to multiple states, plus U.S. EPA headquarters, on what we're doing. Thank you, Roger. Are there any questions for Roger? Okay, seeing none, we'll continue on to the department's emergency order with Kelly Ann Lee, our Red Hill project coordinator, and Kathy. Go ahead, Kelly Ann. Hi, everyone. Can you hear me? Little soft. OK, I'll try to talk loud and be quick because I know we're short on time. So I'm going to give a brief summary of work being done under our emergency order that was finalized on May 6, 2022. It requires the Navy to close and to fill the facility as quickly and safely as possible. So in November of last year, the Navy Navy to close and you feel the facility as quickly and safely as possible. So in November of last year, the Navy, with our oversight, was able to unpack one million gallons of fuel from the facility pipelines without incident. So now that the facility is unpacked, they can begin doing repairs. So on November 1st, they gave us a list of 253, I believe, repairs that were recommended before safety fueling can occur. So we are working with them to shorten that list to expedite the defueling timeline. So repairs that are redundant, or we believe represents a low risk if they do not occur we are giving the navy permission to remove those repairs for example two weeks ago we approved a deviation from the repairs list that the navy tells us may shorten the defueling timeline by three months so that's the sort of thing that we're going for um now i'll talk about the closure side so on november 1st as well we received the navy's closure plan we found it a little lacking in detail so we provided a list of 86 questions to them and we're awaiting their response and we have not yet approved the closure plan so in the um as you probably all know the navy and doa and epa in a science fair project to talk about all of these things that's going on at Red Hill. And so the big question came up to us is, why isn't DOH a party to the EPA and Navy's administrative order on consent. And that really is because the Department of Health feels very strongly that its administrative order is protective of public health and the environment. And we want to ensure that we don't yield any of our regulatory authority to anyone and keep it within the state. So with that, does anybody have any questions on the emergency order or the AOC emergency order interface? OK. Kathy, I've got a Aurora. Go ahead. Unm unmute yourself. Yeah, so sorry I haven't tracked this as much recently. So this is a different administrative order on consent than the one correct. So there was a 2015 administrative order on consent. It's online. They are taking public comment until February sixth. And what does this just for the rest of us who are as close to it. What does this mean for the regular voting public? Yeah, so the Department of Health had its emergency order, right? EPA did not have something similar. And so this administrative order and consent allows them to regulate the def defueling decommissioning aspects of it. There's met there's other aspects of it that you should actually read if you're very much interested in, but that's. Mike, go ahead. Your question. Yeah, and this is not quite a question, Commissioner Hall. It's as much, Chair, for your radar screen. Our last administration formed a permitted interaction group, which strongly recommended that we use further regulatory authority over the wall, the Water Commission specifically to modify their water permits to assure that the long-term recovery what would happen uh that that motion was uh you not you're unanimously approved by the full commission the commission there was some some resistance to implement that uh at the end of this last administration's uh and i think some of this may be better discussing executive executive summary with which i'm not recommending now but. T. John McCune He, M.D.: Deputy manual is fully aware of the water commission that's an issue that we would like to discuss with you and in cooperation with department of health sometime uh for future uh water commission meetings thank you thank you very much mike i appreciate getting the update on that and i will get briefed by kaleo regarding the status of Red Hill and Water Commission's interplay in the current situation. Thank you. So is there any other questions by the commissioners? So Kathy, this is Donna. I just want to confirm your the fact that DOH is not a signatory to the consent order, you are still retaining your regulatory authority and oversight on the Navy's compliance with your own regulations? Very much so with our emergency order. Okay. Are you ready to go toe to toe with them? God, is that a silly question? Yes, of course I am. I know you are ready to protect public health in the environment. I appreciate that very much. Thank you so much. I'm not sure who to direct it to, but it's, is there any kind of environmental surveillance that is being conducted that the Navy isn't doing or a Navy contractor isn't doing just as the defueling happens? Because we don't want to be learning after the fact. Yeah. And you know what, Commissioner, I think if you, that you hold that thought, your answer, your question may be answered in the next two speakers. Got it. Thank you. So continuing on, we will have the drinking water long-term monitoring plan with Dennis Lopez, Safe Drinking Water Branch Chief. Hello, my name is Dennis Lopez, Safe Drinking Water Branch Chief. Hello, my name is Dennis Lopez, Safe Drinking Water Branch Chief or Program Manager. The water testing today indicate compliance with the long-term monitoring analytical limits. Exceedences has predominantly been lead found in fixtures with impermiss plumbing. Remediation response include replacement of fixtures or to take the fixture out of service. Periods one to three, starting April, 2023, I sampled 5% of homes and buildings for each monthly period. Approximately 1,630 buildings and home locations were sampled in the first three periods, adding to already 1,000 plus buildings and home sampled in stage 4. Stage 5 is the long-term monitoring plan. Period 4 was completed in November 2022. Approximately 1,122 building and home locations were sampled in that period. And we are now in period five, which is slated to end in May, 2023 with another 1,122 buildings and homes. This, the LTM will run to February, 2024. And we're keeping continued vigilance on all the buildings and homes and distribution system. As a reminder, Red Hill shaft is not part of the distribution system that is isolated. The Navy Halawa shaft is currently not in use. And the Joint Base Pearl Harbor and the consecutive system Maliamanu Military Reservation is being served by a single source at Wai'awa. And that completes my presentation. Commissioner's any questions? All right, Joanne, your last presenter. Thank you. Actually, yeah. So the last presenter is Phoenix Grange of the Hazard Evaluation Emergency Response Office on the aquifer monitoring and recovery. Phoenix, you're muted. Good afternoon, everyone. Can you hear me all right? Yes. Okay, so I have been leading the environmental team, evaluating the groundwater and doing our best to understand what's happening in the subsurface with the previous spills and also looking ahead to ensure that the Navy has done the work necessary to be ready should a spill happen during defueling there are many efforts being overseen by our engineering folks as well to ensure that the likelihood of a release is low but nonetheless very important that we understand where fuel might go should it should that happen so that we can be prepared and protect the local groundwater sources. We do that in a number of ways in terms of directing the Navy to put in additional sentinel wells so that we have early warning systems to protect the Board of Water Supply wells in Halawa and elsewhere, as well as other water sources in the area. A whole lot of the way that we, the data that we collect is regular monitoring, groundwater monitoring, soil vapor monitoring on a very frequent basis so that we can, and then we have our subject matter experts really sit down and study those to understand what kinds of patterns we're seeing. The other one of the things that has been a responsibility of the Navy since the AOC was signed was to complete a groundwater flow model, be able to understand how the water, you know, from the water table down, how it is moving, what direction it's moving. And so that helps us understand how contaminants might be transported. We also require contaminant fate and transport. And that's generally how fuel that spilled on the ground into the ground moves above the water table, but underground. So with the lava flows here, fuels can kind of get trapped in pockets some places but they can also flow rapidly through cracks and other sorts of things like that so we're working hard to understand what's happening there um as the um the groundwater modeling efforts that the Navy have done to date, we have not found satisfactory in terms of their ability to represent real data that we collect out there. So things like changes in temperature, chemistry of the water, other sorts of things like that. So while we continue to work with them on that for now, we are also very focused on additional efforts, including field studies. University of Hawaii received a grant from the Office of Naval Research with Don Thomas as the principal investigator. So he has independent federal funding to be able to do further investigations to help us with modeling with those sorts of things. We do have a whole lot of data coming in, and one of the questions from one of the constituents, I'm not sure if she's on the line, Catherine McCallaghan. She had a list of questions in order to save time today. I'm not going to go through those one by one, but I have them ready to send to her and would be happy to send them to the Commission as well. Really have to do with understanding what those long sheets of data that come from the department that are posted on the department of health website what they mean etc so um and if you have any questions i'm happy to yes i'm sorry you were kind of going in and out so oops all right so um i just want to confirm are you going to be able to make that data available to the water commission data themselves are available on our um on our doh website and it's a sort of a cumulative summary of all of the um data collected under our emergency orders. So back going from the May release of 2021 and the November release. So Catherine had specific questions about why there appear to be data gaps in certain areas, why sometimes the data didn't get posted, especially right after the May release. Samples were collected starting in May, why sometimes the data didn't get posted, especially right after the May release. Samples were collected starting in May, but we were not able to get our hands on those data until late in the summer. And some of the data in June and July, we didn't get until late end of September. So we weren't able to post those at that time. Again, there's sort of a lot of detail here. I'm happy to send both the data sheet and this information together. That might be the easiest way for people to answer, I mean, to understand what we're talking, what the questions are and what our answers are. Any other questions? Oh, Aurora, go ahead. I see your hand up. Yeah. Thanks, Phoenix, for the update. So my understanding was, you know, that was at a time where you were waiting for the Navy to hand over data and they were lagged. And then now DOH is taking independent sampling is that correct like getting split samples and analyzing them separately uh we don't do that consistently but yes we do do it so we did quite a bit of that after the November release and in December and January. So that also involves having our field staff. So Anaya Shinde does a whole lot of that work, is out observing, collecting samples, et cetera. Similarly with the AFFF spill that happened recently, our folks were out there watching, collecting split samples, et cetera, as well. So. And are those data back yet from the labs? Are they posted on the DOH website? Sorry, there's three questions. Are they back from the labs? Are they posted on the DOH website? And is it all now kind of more in the same place? Because from what I remember, it was sometimes hard to navigate what information. We have an agreement from the Navy to produce that data so that we can, so it should be posted on Friday of this week for the PFAS release. And that includes soil data from the soil and also from groundwater wells as well. Aurora, there is a recognition on my behalf that our website can be difficult for and unfriendly. So we are actively working on trying to make it a better, easier to navigate. I see that I think I noticed that it was more organized for public access. So it's good to know that it'll all be accessible through that one site that Joanna pointed out. Thank you. Just one more note, the AFFF, the laboratory that they're using for the PFAS has been what we understood in talking to the Navy is that it's taking time for those data to come back as well. They have, sounds like most all of the first week's data and they're hoping to get. So the goal for Friday is to be able to post all of the first two weeks of data that were collected after the event. And those are sort of the most significant. That's when they're trying to characterize, figure out where the edges of contamination were, et cetera. Phoenix, this is Dawn. Oh, go ahead. Aurora, did you want to ask something? I'm kind of the new kid on the block over here. Is DOH, are you the repository of data? Do you collect also Board of Water Supplies data as well? The Board of Water Supply data belongs to them. We would certainly be delighted to have it. And I think that there is interest on all parties to be able to share data, so we can all see what's going on. The. We have acted as a repository of the Navy's data and of our data. The Navy has it has it online as well. They are currently expanding their safe water site that was originally for the drinking water in neighborhoods that were affected by the spill, but they now have an environmental data section online. It's sort of in its beginning stages, but that is there as well. And we are, as Kathy mentioned, looking to figure out how to make these both access to the information and the way the information is presented in a more user-friendly way so that you don't end up having to go through lots of different documents or search through large, you know, very large Excel files, et cetera. So we're still working on that and the Navy is doing that as well. Thank you. But essentially you don't have Board of Water Supplies data. We do not have Board of Water Supplies data. We have spoken about that with them and we still hope that we can get it. It really, every piece of data that we have about what's happening in different parts of the region, especially around their wells, helps us understand, helps us model and understand what might be happening in that area. And they also, you know, are similarly interested in our data and the Navy data. Sure. Any other questions? Aurora, go ahead. Aurora Donzelli, Sorry, I would usually wait for Commissioner buck to ask more but i'm given. Aurora Donzelli, Given this new and backing up to Kathleen whole but, given this new potential AOC is there, what does DOH do as an optimistic timeline for defueling, since you folks have been on this for a long time? Yeah, so you know it's really important for us to, we recognize that fuel in the tanks can lead to a catastrophe, But there's also a recognition that if we defuel too quickly without critical repairs that's being done to the pipeline, that it could lead to a similar catastrophe. So we're trying to balance the two. And we do believe that the repairs to the pipeline is critical as we defuel. So we're looking, you know, I can't, it's, you know, we're hoping that the repairs to the pipeline will be done sometime in early 2024 and defueling subsequently. So completed in 2020, early 2020. Yes. But we, EPA is looking at any possible way that we can shorten that time frame without cutting corners and causing potential absolutely right because uh we don't want another catastrophe yeah yeah okay thank you commissioner viviani kogawa viv. We have the Navy's latest defueling schedule as a link on our website so you can find that there. And we also have a condensed timeline version that the department has compiled that was shared at the open house last week, Thursday. Would you mind just screen sharing just for those watching in the public as a teaser so they know that we should all go check out the website? So sharing the web page you mean? Okay, let me share, make sure I share the right screen because I have too many open, of course. Share. Trying to find it. Hold on. There we go. I know. I think I'm going to share it. Hold on. There we go. I know. Sorry, I just have too many windows open. I hope this is it. Okay, so this is our Department of Health website for the Red Hill water information, and you would go to the emergency order, and the condensed timeline would be at this location here. Okay, so this is the summary of the defueling timeline where we have the NAVY estimate of repairs complete by November 27th, 2023. And defueling estimated to be complete June 24th, 2024. A little bit sooner than I had understood, so that's helpful. Thank you for pointing us and giving a brief tour of the site. Sure. I know I'm trying to figure out how to get back to the screen. Sure. At the top of your screen, usually at the top of my screen. Right down below. And Joanne, I am so impressed you were able to do that. I could have never done that. Okay. Mr. Katayama? Yes, go ahead. Wayne, you have a question? I don't know if this is for Joanne or Catherine, but this is, you know, sort of forward looking. As you've gone through the Red hill experience you have the 900 pound gorilla sitting on top of a 1800 pound valuable resource and it from you know from the cheap seats at 60 000 feet it seems like the institutional knowledge of the operators of that 900 pound gorilla weren't very good um i guess looking forward can you recommend things that the commission can look at to be more proactive rather than reactive to these situations and i recognize doh has a certain responsibility for safe drinking water epa has a certain responsibility for water quality but it seems that the navy's institutional knowledge and coping with the potential hazard of the fuel has been suspect in my mind where they keep turning the wrong valves or getting contractors who are directed to do work that sort of. That's a really good question. And, you know, operationally, I think the Navy has demonstrated that they were not able to operate that facility safely, which led to our first emergency order, which is why we issued be drills on the defueling itself. And there's going to be monitoring both by EPA, DOH, and independent contractors as they defuel. So hopefully it will go as they did with the unpacking, which we went through the similar drills. They didn't release any fuel at that time and they unpacked approximately, I want to say 100 million gallons of fuel out of those pipelines. And so I think if we continue to be vigilant and make them go through the steps and monitor, hopefully we can successfully defuel these tanks. Are you recommending organizational changes to develop institutional knowledge so they can be proactive in managing the current water systems that they have responsibility for? Oh, that's a separate question. So you're talking about the use of their water and managing their water system. Well, with all the different hazards that they have, I mean, being in the military, that's what you deal with. You have fuel, weapons. I think that could be best answered by Dennis, who is the manager of the safe drinking water branch. Are there any other situations like that where you have maybe a 400-pound gorilla sitting on a 400-pound water resource? Generally speaking, I don't know if Dennis is here, but generally situations like that where you have maybe a 400 pound gorilla sitting on a 400 pound water resource? Generally speaking, I don't know if Dennis is here, but generally speaking, and Joanna, you can certainly jump in. Generally speaking, the Department of Health regulates the water system provider. In other words, we would regulate border water supply or the Navy. It's up to the purveyor of that water to provide safe drinking water to its customers. So in that way, I think based on, and the other thing is currently the Navy is not getting its water from Red Hill Shaft, they're getting it from from Yava Shaft, which is the same shaft that we all are getting our water from. And so first I think we have to, we have to remediate the aquifer before we can come to that determination on how they're going to regulate the water to their users. If anybody, Joanna or Dennis, if you want to chime in. Again, I'm looking more to be reactive. Yeah. Rather than, you know, I don't want to be in the reactive mode. I want to be in a proactive mode i want to be a proactive mode i understand that and maybe that's a discussion that we can have as a commissioner i think i think that where we i think that's the value of this what we provide as sea worm yeah you have your job and i understand and thank goodness for that okay Okay, thanks, Kathy. Sure. Any other questions from the commissioners? Aurora, is that your hand up? That is electronic hand, but I wasn't sure if Dennis, there was a response for you, or there was something you were going to say uh no i thought i was being asked to to comment um i can still comment if if um commissioner katayama wants me to if you could kind of rephrase the question for me i just wondering from the lessons learned as you're going through this red hill, rather than being reactive to situations, what can we do to be more proactive in assuring ourselves that whoever the purveyor is, has institutional knowledge to anticipate before a situation gets out of hand where it endangers our water systems. What can we do? Well, you know, when we did assist the EPA with the water system portion of the ACO, and in there, we worked with them with the water system portion of the ACO. And in there, we worked with them to put together a plan to increase their capability to respond, to clear that drinking water system. A couple items that we had them put in is to have a hydraulic model. The hydraulic model of the water distribution system was lacking during the response time. It prohibited a couple of flushing techniques like unidirectional flushing that they couldn't do. Other items that we wanted them to make sure that the Navy had as part of their response is valve maintenance program. Some of the excuses the Navy had is they didn't want to touch certain valves and hence it couldn't be unidirectional flushing. So all the excuses that came up to us, we helped the EPA put that in their plan. We couldn't mandate them to do that because we have to think about all the other water systems out there, and not everybody has the resources to come up with a flushing plan with a hydraulic model. But the Navy is a special situation, and with the consent order, it allowed us that path to basically assist them to improve their water system. What we're seeing is that the Navy has a lot of money that was put into their maintenance program, but when the money gets there, it gets pushed in different directions. And so, you have a utility that had, in our opinion, deferred maintenance over time. And we wanna make sure that they're able to respond if something happens the threat is not only red hill but they could have a backflow issue with you know all the industrial processes over there and so we're hoping that that will create the model encourage other systems to learn from this improve their systems accordingly work we're we're not a permitted permitted driven entity we want to bring everybody into compliance with the safe drinking water act we do provide funding through our low interest loans through srf program to to help the water system deliver that water clean water to their customers. However, the Navy, as a federal entity, cannot participate in our SRF funds, but there's a lot of funds out there for the rest of the 130-plus systems around the islands, especially we also have principal forgiveness loans for those small systems that are disadvantaged so this is a great opportunity and i know i kind of divert on the conversation i just want to promote that we do have a sri program and we want to not only help the navy but we want to help all our public water systems thank you good good to know. Thank you. Aurora, is that your hand? Yeah, my question riffs off of Commissioner Katayama's, which is, you know, we didn't have a December meeting, and it would have been a good chance to think about what have we learned in the last year, and what kind of institutional changes do we need to implement to function better in future potential water crises? And so i'm curious to the department. You know one thing the permitted interaction group struggled with, and it seems like we're talking more openly now, not an executive session. So that's helpful. But you know what is the role that the commission plays? As you said, we need to clean up the aquifer, and that has implications for how we consider our available water. If it's contaminated, is it available, you know, at cost for you know. But you know what is the role that you guys see? We know what at least a couple of us know where we think the commission should be at the table with DOH but where does DOH see the commission playing an important role in helping really do carry out our duty to Kaahubu'oi well as you know we are we do have a meeting with the Navy, EPA, CWRM, our trust, trustees of the resource can play, can determine what roles we play. I think there's gonna be a meeting of the RAP-R in February, Joanna? Yeah. Yes. uh yeah yes um yeah i think we're getting to the part of the discussion that has a real keen interest to me uh first i want to thank department pell for your presentation today and for all that you're doing uh in this regard uh but it's really unclear to what I always what's challenging for me in these reports whether it's the navy or EPA or the department of health is what does this mean for us what is our kuleana here and how do we optimize our working relationship and collaboration with these other agencies and it strikes me Kathy if it exists let me Kathy, if it exists, let me know, or if it can happen, I'd like your opinion on that as well. Is there some kind of collaboration agreement amongst the agencies that identifies our shared goals, that talks about the duties of the parties, and talks about how we're going to coordinate in our action plans to optimize each other's outcomes. Does that exist? Shouldn't it? I think that's one of the goals of the what we call the the rap are I can't remember the name of the what it stands for, but I think that's one of the goals is to get all the um the uh trustees together and to cut to um to work towards um understanding with the uh with epa and the navy on um remediation of the aquifer well from our standpoint we think that's essential it's real critical for us to be able to do our job uh whether you like it or what participating in that i'm being hard i did i was speaking over here i apologize for that sorry i kaleo has been um participating in the rap bar well, it'd be good to see that. And to, as we sit here then, and we see the actions, the duties of the parties and the coordinated plan, then we have some milestones. So when these reports come in, we can have a discussion of what the milestone was for various agencies and their progress toward achieving that and what the milestone was for various agencies and their progress toward achieving that and what the variance is. And then what the consequences of those variances are for our own individual efforts that are our kuleana and not yours or EPA's or the Navy's and so forth. So I'm pleased that I hope that brand new year know so let's set some goals and maybe we could in the short order come up with that collaboration agreement second with respect to our commission it seems to me and correct me if i'm not getting this and i'm going to use the word resource i mean fresh water resource uh our job is to protect resource quantity, to manage resource accessibility, usually that's by giving permits to wells and so forth, or in some cases taking wells offline, and third, allocate resources prudently. So as this crisis unfolds, it seems to me we're wanting to know, are we doing all that we can and using all the tools that we have to dispatch those three key areas of, you know, key kuleana that we have. So, and we work together with Board of Water Supply or DOH to, okay, what's this threat to the resource that we need to protect? And what do we need to do? Number we took it offline right along with the board of water supply and so that helps to reduce the threat with respect to resource accessibility again we're not going to access that we need to develop more resources access we need more well permits out there we need to support that what are we doing and what is the timeframe for that? And what are the targets for that? And finally, we need to, as we're allocating resources, what do we need to do to change the permits that we have outstanding? Whether it's to the Navy or anybody else, do we need to reduce people's allocation? Do we need to, you know, what do we need to do? So I think, again, this is not a backward look, it's not criticism, it's just as we look forward with excitement about how to do our jobs better in this brand new year, can we get to that where we then are having these reports and getting this information, all this detail in the context of a plan and what our targets are and where we're on plan and we're ahead of plan and behind plan. So maybe I'll just jump in. I totally agree. I think just in trying to keep up with DOH as our sister agency on the quality side um this past year has been really just trying to triage and um figure out how to how to best support each other in this process um the permanent interaction group started last january and wrapped up with the report in june or july so it took us some time to figure out where we wanted to go and what we wanted to see done. And I think there's been clear guidance, at least from the commission thus far. We have to update and refresh with this new administration on where we want to go. And as Governor Green made in his state of state address, you know, he's and this administration is committed to taking a more active role on coordinating at the state level, at his level. So and and Deputy Ho will be the lead and we're going to find ways to support her through that. Just in case you didn't get the state of the state, that was what he said. Deputy Ho will be the lead. So we, you know, as a member of this body, it's critical, right, that we find ways to coordinate between Department of Health and the Water Commission in what we do. That RAPAR was brought up, Katie, ahead of our planning. It is a planning function. It's the idea of bringing together all these various plans and commitments that have been made related to remediation of the aquifer but also just short-term plants like infueling etc into one kind of repository of information commissioner buck has also been part of that rap our conversation and so we've we've provided critique on how we can improve that and we're working with those parties to make it the best kind of tool that we can all work on and use um it may what i do see happening is we may need to develop one specifically for the water commission so we don't get gobbled up in the larger pull on of remediation we have our specific goals and metrics that we want to see accomplished so that's something that you know I'm committed now that I'm here again um to work on with staff and and you will see more data and more information coming back to the commission and my commitment really to hold space on Red Hill um with this body because it is complicated it's complex there's a lot of information that needs to be shared but having something to report to every month, I think, like you mentioned, is gonna be helpful to see forward progress and not a bunch of kind of running in circles on this issue. Yeah, I certainly appreciate the governor's confidence in Kathy and the department and support that. And we want to be a member of the team but we have an important responsibility in and of ourselves this for this managing this vital resource and it seems to me it helps her do her job as well as help us do our job if we really have a clear understanding of you know what our needs are to make the decisions we we we need to make about this resource and so let's get let's lock that in and then that you're informed with that you're able to carry that to the meetings that you have with all the other agencies no i appreciate that if i can just kind of chime in um i think as kathy mentioned this RAP meeting is going to occur in February, perhaps the next meeting before all of us, we can have a real good hard conversation, whether that's an executive session or an open session. And this is what I've been telling our DLNR divisions. Our Kulian is hard enough as it is is so i'm really about into staying in our lane but i want to know what our lane is too so likewise with the water commission um you know sort of coming back on what um commissioner hannis is talking about i mean i think we need to be very clear so that when our representative sits on that rap they're advocating a clear message from where we see our kuleana to be. So I think Kaleo will schedule that for our next meeting. And if we have to have a special meeting or something in preparation for that, just to empower you with a clear message from the commission. And clearly I need to get up to speed so you and I can talk story about both the outcomes of the pig and then where we need to go forward so i do want to kind of um anybody does anybody have any other questions okay now appreciated the conversation we do have public i have yep so go ahead joanna do you have anybody else before we open up to the public i have one last portion of the website to share. This is on the Red Hill Shaft filtration and discharge into Halawa Stream. This is the last section of the table, and it provides you with a Red Hill weekly operations report for the discharge that is going through the GAC system and into Halawa Stream. The report of January 8th through 14th says that they have been averaging a discharge of 4.23 million gallons per day. There have been 42 samples taken per week for influent and effluent, and all the results have been non-detect. So that is all I have for the report that we are giving today. Thank you so much. I greatly appreciate DOH's comprehensive update to the Water Commission. We do have members of the public who want to provide testimony. So is it Dean? Let me see. I think I have a list, too. Chair, everybody's in the room. Okay. So the first person on the list is Sherry Pollitt. Do you want to provide your testimony? And she's not present. Okay. Come on up, Beamer. Are you here? No. Okay. Okay. Catherine McL... Catherine, I'm just gonna... McLenahan? McLenahan. Are you here? I am. Okay. Can you hear me? we can yes thank you so much for having me um my name is catherine mclennahan my family and i were guests of the island during the contamination at red hill um i wanted to come today and i've appreciated just listening to the commission's role and if you'll bear with me, just ever so slightly off of the questions that Phoenix already said she would offline discuss with me based on some of the data, but Mr. Katayama's comment about being proactive versus reactive, our families, I feel like really experienced that, the downside of being reactive. And as you look at the future of Oahu's aquifer, your public health, your environment, I think what Mr. Katayama was saying is indeed the focus. So a couple of my questions really still have to do with that. One of the main ones is for, I I guess the Hawaii Department of Health, when did you actually receive groundwater sampling data for the May 2021? June 2021? July 2021 dates? Are any of y'all this Liz, would you have an answer? And I'll leave the remainder of those questions, but it kind of has to do with that answer. I can certainly answer that. This is Phoenix Grange. So I did have a chance to go through your questions. So those the first data. Over that summer. We did not get data from the Navy for a long time, so we didn't get what was going on. I think the first data, we got was in August. Of 21 or of 21? Yes, so the release was, you know, in May. Yeah. A little while to get the sample, you know, sort of sampling underway, etc. Okay. And then we didn't really, then the July data we didn't receive until the end of September. And the Navy reported that it was, the labs were backed up, it was just taking a very long time. And so we didn't get those data until later. And then things had already happened, right? We had seen some detections in the wellfield, et cetera. And then eventually some effects in the retinal shaft. And was that a common practice? And I'll keep my comment to my two minutes. But is that a common practice that the DOH struggles to receive data that you're expecting from the Navy groundwater sampling data? Has that been a pattern, a history there? It happened. We have had some continuing issues with that, yes. Okay. had some continuing issues with that. Yes. Okay, partly, some of it had to do with simply the volume of samples that were coming in. One of the things that's very important to us is as soon as they do get access to data that we need to see it right away. Right. Okay. And so I guess I'll just leave it with this to the your commission and really just focusing on the future of your aquifer. Just as a resident that to me um is a problem that we've all experienced and if somebody has the magic answer to being able to provide your commission families the public data in a timely manner is there some force of consequence or public notice that can go out when data is delayed, is by default late? I feel like in the future for your aquifer and your protections, if you can't, if every time the Navy has something of concern, they just decide to not give you the data, what are your recourses and maybe getting some of your levers the governor and those involved to have a stronger force to come back and alert the public but also punish the purveyor who is delinquent in getting that information. I appreciate y'all's work. I wish y'all a wonderful and healthy future aquifer. My family and I have moved off now, but we are going to continue fighting for the future for our loving friends and family there on Oahu and for your future aquifer. Thank you for your time today. And I'll take offline Phoenix conversation with you. I appreciate it. Okay, sounds good. I will send you an email. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Appreciate your testimony. Yes. The next person is Susan Piccola Davis. davis jessica y'all can you hear me yes go ahead well, when we're calling in, you see my face and all that. And that would be click before I use my face. Good afternoon. And because usually if my video is on, my audio starts to change. If I change the audio, I mean, I don't. Yes, I'm sorry, Susan. We're having a little hard time with your reception. I'm sorry. Yeah, if you turn off your camera, maybe it might help with connection so we can hear your testimony do you want to try again um kalea thought maybe if you turned up your visual, you might be able to hear you better. I can't do, okay, there. How is it now? Better. Better. Okay, yeah. I can't do okay there how's it now better better okay yeah so y'all already know what I look like so that's good okay um lots of interesting conversation and lots of catching up from december i will go through my questions i don't know if you saw them ahead of time i also provided probably seven attachments that you can take a look at later on i'm not going to um digress from my questions i'm going to start with environmental action levels. And I have questions, but I don't know if they can be answered. Okay. Using a plume degradation described as non-detect, I'm not sure why I could not get an answer yesterday. So say you're in a house and you get your sample report back and the highest action level is 266. 165 would you feel comfortable having an only one unit difference between being called it's detected or non-detected he ex mr brew explained how this number is determined mind you at the december 15 22 bdw board of water supply meeting he said his spreadsheet had an error and he had to recalculate he also explained how he is a risk assessor not a toxicologist he says he solicits information for many sources that's great but in the most recent publication by the Department of Health, the updated environmental action levels with strict calculation models for EALs. Did you use that model to develop the spreadsheet? In my questions, I'm also asking for your credentials. Exactly how are EAL levels decided? By whom? Give us the names and the question is does that make you feel confident that his spreadsheet doesn't have any more errors next on my agenda is sampling during the actual sampling in the zones Hawaii department of Health used several lower incident specific levels, 300, 200, and Q11. The Department of Health still hasn't clearly explained to the public why that was. So my question is why. Three is the sampling reports. Upon review of the online sampling reports, it appears that any sample of TPHG0 or D that fell below the incident specific level was determined as non detect, leading customers to believe that their water was level of 200 and the sample is 199, 199 will be notated as non-detect and that's not right. It still should be on the report. Lastly, the Department of Health and the EPA and the consent order. The thing I want to say and maybe a question that Ms. Ho, Catherine can think about is what regular regulatory authority would you be giving up or the state be giving up if you partnered with the EPA on this consent order, although I have heard you several times saying that you're gonna stick with the 2015 emergency order, which I plan to go through tonight to compare it to the consent order to see what's the big deal. What power is this that you're trying to give up um no i have one more okay your time is could you just summarize yeah go ahead we're talking about the amount of water that is going from red hill shaft into a lava stream at the meeting yesterday we talked about when was the last time that fuel was detected at the Red Hill shaft discharging millions of gallons into Halawa stream. There probably was a date, but they have not found or determined whether all of this water going into Halawa stream is beneficial or not. And I think after 14 months of doing this and wasting our water, wouldn't it be nice to know? Dennis, I appreciate your understanding of unidirectional flushing and hydraulic models and the valves the Navy is not understanding of this and if you provide any information to them to keep them on track for the long-term monitoring project to go on the public would send you flowers. Thank you very much. All right. Thank you. Don't wait before the Navy answered. Julie, did you, your hand was raised? Yeah. I mean, it's, this is public testimony. I guess it's at the option of DOH to respond, but they're not required to provide a response in this forum. So I just wanted to say that. But I know that. Thank you for that. So thank you. Thank you for that. I think what we'd like to do is there were so many questions. If we could respond to her questions in writing. And is it different questions than what we had received yesterday and we can we'll put it up on our website is that the best respond okay yes they're they're somewhat different Kathleen okay so Miss Pecola Davis if you could forward those to the Department of Health, and then Department of Health if you could just make sure we get a copy of whatever the public responses. And I think in the future. Yeah, I would agree with Deputy Attorney General Julie Tina. This is public testimony, but not intended to be um a necessarily a um man they are required to answer you go ahead no i just i know that they are not required to answer nor was i expecting them to okay all right i was just sharing my questions okay as a as a person in public i appreciate all the work that you do. These questions have been emailed to DLNR for today's meeting. And if Catherine wants me to forward that email I can. Okay, thank you. You are not, you are not obliged to answer the questions, I understand that. If you choose to do that, I would appreciate it, but I know that you're a busy woman. Thank you. We appreciate the testimony. Thank you so much. Is there anyone else in the public that wishes to provide public comment? Dean, do you have anybody else? That was the last person on the list that I was given. Sorry, I think was he went to Naka. Oh, i'm sorry I didn't see the hand up. Go ahead, Wayne. Did you? Oh, we to knock up there you go. Ah, there you are. Go ahead. Good afternoon, Chair Chang and members of the Commission. Wintonaka again for the Sierra Club of Hawaii. We want. I really want to express appreciation for the hard work that the commission commission staff, the Department of Health and their staff doing over the last gosh, 18 months to kind of address this crisis. I did want to highlight 3 problems. Oh, there are many, but I think three kind of big problems that should be, I'd like to raise the attention of the commission and to the Department of Health. Firstly, I appreciate that there was swift action needed to prevent the spread of the AFFF concentrate after the 1300 gallons were spilled last year. I think I just have really deep concerns about the capping. And it wasn't just a capping, but backfilling over excavated areas, which essentially means it's gonna be very difficult to re-excavate if necessary. And even sample from a third-party perspective. I'm not sure if the DOH folks were able to provide exact, conduct an assessment as to where the rains may have spread that concentrate, where the soil samples were taken, if they're able to take their own samples and you know and have independent objective testing or if we're just relying on the navy to indicate whether they were able to clean up their own mess. So you know I think that's a very and also to the facilities forest right so a tremendous amount of this concentrate was released in the facility we know that rainwater infiltrates it pretty continually and the concrete floor is also not water type. And so you know there's also concerns about what's going on inside. That being said, you know it may be difficult again to assess the remediation efforts at in, but also looming is the fact that they are going to continue using potentially uh a triple f right they need some kind of fire suppression uh capability within the facility and so you know I think it's really important that we keep the pressure up to ensure that they don't uh continue holding you know this these forever chemicals just 100 feet above our groundwater aquifer because they are tremendously toxic. Parts per quadrillion, that's like for PFOA, I think that's like one drop in 1,000 Olympic-sized swimming pools that could render this water unsafe under the EPA's interim health advisory guidelines. The second problem is the, and I do have some suggested actions, proactive actions that we can do to address these problems. The second problem is a drinking water system that serves not just the Navy, but also civilian housing. I really appreciate that there's multiple attempts to kind of refine the water testing process that's been going on. But that being said, we know from the September 2022 CDC ATSDR survey that there are almost 300 people that continue to report seeing or tasting sheens in their water, as well as you know almost 800 folks that have continued health effects um and so you know i really want to urge uh continued uh you know thinking around what might be the cause of that discrepancy um because we can't just dismiss one data set because another data set says you know like allen says that the water is fine and there are folks moving in to these housing units who really have don't really have much informed consent in my opinion to determine what their risk is should they decide to use their tap water for domestic use and consumption. And, you know, I think, and also to you know we know that there's many, many other issues with the water system there'll be other things in there, both in jet fuel, which isn't just pure TPH also to you know we know that there's many many other issues with the water system. There'll be other things in there both in jet fuel which isn't just pure Tphd. But could include antimicrobial and to freeze chemicals as well as just issues with their water system, which we know from the Eps investigation has not been operated and still isn't being operated in compliance with safety water regulations. And then the third problem issue, I think, is the need to be really continue to be hyper vigilant about the Navy's water use. You know, we've just heard that they're dumping on average 4.3 billion, a million gallons of water per day. I mean, multiply that by 360, you get over 1.5 billion gallons. And this commission has been urging them for over a year now to at least start planning on um you know some maybe some kind of alternative reuse of some of that water so we're not wasting our most precious resource um and also too you know i think there's been discussions over the last few months about evaluating the navy's water uses under their wild use permits which are issued by the commission and i do want to urge that you do take some bolder positions. I know the tendency is to be fairly conservative about the state's authority when it comes to the federal government, but we do have a great area where I think now is the time to really kind of assert, if you're gonna assert an aggressive position, like this is it. There's no, I mean, if it's not now, then I don't know when that would be. And so- Oh, there's Gina. Hi, Gina. Oh, hi, Gina. So to get to just a really quick ask of you folks, of the commission members and basically everyone listening, is this EPA consent decree does provide an opportunity for us to get provisions and concrete mechanisms and proactive proactive tools that can avoid the issues with the 2,015 administrative or on consent, which you know, the non-enforcement of which has led to the exacerbation of this crisis. And for your commission members on your individual capacity, your comments as trustees of our public trust, as guardians of our most precious resource, they will carry weight even if it is in your individual capacity. And I did have, you know, three really, I think, basic talking points that you might want to raise or I'd like to respectfully urge you to raise if you do choose to reach out. One is we need concrete deadlines. There's no deadlines in that consent decree. And these deadlines aren't something to be afraid of. We see the Navy's defueling, I mean, sorry, the pipeline repair is going to be done by November, ask for a deadline for August, which I think is actually within the realm of possibility from talking to EPA folks. And if they miss the deadline, then it doesn't mean, you know, you just let it go. I mean, you can have an order to show cause, you can have the Navy come forward and explain what kind of extenuating circumstances may have caused them to miss the deadline, right? So it's not like you're gonna force them to let it rip and endanger us, but at least you have something there. So the Navy knows that they'll have to identify any excuses or justifications they may have. And that way we have at least some safeguard against the foot dragging we've seen. Excuse me, Mr. Tanaka, can you summarize? Cause we're, you've kind of going down the, taken a while. So if you could summarize your testimony. Next two points. Okay, next two. Okay, so advocate for concrete deadlines where you can check on the Navy's progress. Two, ask for uh really urge and i know they're looking at this too but we need to urge this uh to not use pifas based uh concentrate um we don't want another spill uh to push us past the point of no return um and and um and and finally like you this, we need on island testing. The fact that we have to wait, you know we have to send samples to the constant. That might be an issue with the potential conflicts and test results. So you know, Navy's navy is willing to play joint task forces. They're down to you know they're they're on our our side. So let's let's get the epa to get them to consent to funding uh on that in um testing facility that can test for the chemicals of concern um and and and that's that's all i really had i'm happy to talk with any folks offline about these ideas and if you have any questions um and thank you so much for it for your time and attention mahalo thank you very much uh dean is there anyone else in the uh waiting room last one is gina har that just logged in okay go ahead gina three minutes okay my name is gina hara i'm from halawa valley i've been testifying every board meeting since last january and i'm going to talk faster because um i just want you to know exactly what i said last january you're going to have meeting after meeting after meeting everyone is super polite and here we go one year later we are that much closer to another leak my positive suggestion for Mr. Katayama, Neil Hans, and everybody on this board. My suggestion was I asked Admiral Wade, Admiral Wade, the DLA, who's the construction arm, Dave Kleiss. I also asked Michelle Link, the chief engineer of the joint task force to defuel, that we would like as the community to have a blow by blow accounting of the leaks that have happened so far, how those mistakes have been incorporated, and how the defueling blow by blow, minute by minute is really going to go down from the mouths of the actual engineers. This is a major surgery from which we are the people who will be living with the after effects. If it's a botched surgery because we weren't looking at the details enough, it's going to be catastrophic. And if we know anything from the past leaks, it's not about the tanks. It really wasn't about the pipes. It was about the humans and the system. Just like Wayne Katayama was pointing out this series of exercises of dissecting the actual what are we what is the plan we need that and actually admiral wade and um dave kleiss said to us at the epa open house last week after spending hours there Wednesday and Thursday that that made sense. I would like to ask this commission to write a letter to be in support of this with a timeline of this month to have it happen. There is no reason to wait to talk about the details. I asked them to explain the details in the format that they're at. Like if they have alternatives they're concerned about and whatnot. And I would like independent engineers from our community or any community other than the Navy to weigh in and talk about these details. It may take a series of at least 10 times actually, if you ask me, but let's just have one this month. So that's my proposal. And I agree with everyone prior. And I would like to ask you two things. Can you also see yesterday's board of water supply meeting? It's gonna be online. You'll see the testimonies of people there in combination with what Roger Bird, the Department of Health and the EPA was saying. I think it's a must see along with the movie Dark Waters that will explain to us what we are facing with our aquifer with respect to the forever chemicals. Thank you for your time. Thank you so much um jean for your testimony greatly appreciate it thank you um dean is there anyone else in the waiting room uh no that's it chair okay thank you um thank you so much department of health for your presentation and your updates and um participation in our meeting commissioners do you have any final questions but oh thank you okay thank you Joanna thank you so much for your team thank you Kathy commissioners do you have any final comments on this matter before we've got one more item. Okay. All right. So let's go on to the final item on our agenda is C2. It's a CWRM budget and legislative updates. Aloha, Department of Health. Commissioner Kagawa-Viviani, are you trying to talk? Oh. Your mute, your mic is not working or there's no sound coming out. Oh, yeah. Nope. Still can't hear. Yep. Try log off and log back on and we can. There you go. Should I talk? No. Still can't hear. Commissioner Katayama, did you have something you wanted to add? No? Okay, thank you. Okay, well, I guess while Commissioner Kagawa Viviani works on her mic, Dean, can you share your screen for the presentation on item c2 so real quickly uh chair and and commissioners as well as community um we wanted to take this opportunity in the beginning of ledge to kind of just highlight where we're at in budget um and some of the bills that, at least the administrative bill that's been introduced as of yesterday, and then kind of some of the things that we may see, we might not see coming out. And I'm trying to recall, I don't think we've done this before with the commission, but I think it's timely and hopefully we can do this more often, keep you updated as our decision-making body. So next think it's timely and hopefully we can uh do this more often keep you updated as our decision-making body so um next it's really short three three or four slides um we're noted known as lnr 404 in the dnr budget so if you see that in budget worksheets it's very budget oriented tons of sheets and excels. But that is our budget number. In general, here's our base budget and I, we talked a lot about lack of resources or need for more resources but this is a quick summary from my very simplistic view as an administrator. We have 27 positions within the water commission, four of those were added in the past during my last tenure prior to that we've been short I mean we've grown since 1987 it's been around this this much we've between the teens deal on our budget. So we talk about balance and need for resources, 27 out of 1,084 for water is really telling. And that's the picture that I try to paint for most people. 22 of those are general funded. Five of the other are, five of them are special funded out of the state land development fund. Those are revenues generated off of leases developed by land division on before the board our fiscal 23 operating budget was a little over 4 million that includes almost 3 million in general funds and then special funds those are our ceilings so we have a ceiling of $356,474 from our Water Resource Management Special Fund, and then a ceiling of $812,768 from what we call our SPAM Special Fund. The SPAM Special Fund funds those five positions, but also has about $110,000 that comes from the SLDF fund for stream studies it primarily pays for staff travel the team that you see here doing our stream measuring monitoring etc um as well as pays for some of our stream cages um the other general funds that are used, almost almost 2 million goes to staff personnel costs. Right now about a million goes to the USGS gauging contract. So we have almost very limited, maybe less than half a million of discretionary funding for our general operations. So that's just the world that we have to work within. And so we talk about resources and managing resources so those are some of the challenges we work on yeah go ahead do you have all the position funded positions filled great question so no the four positions so we got four aquatic biologists positions in spam branch that make up these 27 um those four uh were created in 2019 taken away during pandemic and just got put back in last session so we're working on establishing those um we have one vacancy in groundwater that we're trying to fill and then come february 1st that'll be it we'll just have that those four aquatic biologists positions and that one um groundwater position that's vacant so 22 we'll have 22 filled yeah oh second quick did i miss it where do fines go fines will go into the water resource management fund second yeah so that those fines fees those come in and that's the special management fund under 174C5.5 that articulates what that fund can be used for. And in general, we've advocated for, I've advocated since I've been here, for $2 million annually in the CIP budget for deep monitoring well development. It costs about that much to do one deep monitoring well. And so far, we've been successful in upping that to yearly requests. Prior administrations or strategies have been to ask every supplemental year, so every other year. But in our USGS monitoring program or proposed build out, it's going to take, you know, 100 years if we just do one every two years. So we need to really ramp this up and and ask for more development funds if we want to get a better understanding especially of our groundwater resources and aquifers in the face of climate change so that's the base um next slide i'm going to talk about what got into the budget is in the budget now so we had asked for those four aquatic biologists positions were re-established but whenever you re-establish start positions you only get half the year funding so this year we're asking for full year funding which is identified there for those four aquatic biologists positions we are working with our hr office to determine whether that classification is appropriate or not and we may be shifting to some other classifications like general professionals that gives us more flexibility to meet the needs of our staff and the work that we need to do. Then there's a CIP appropriation for deep monitoring wealth. So those are the two funding, the budget that was approved that made it into the EA administration budget. And then legislation, Senate Bill 1386 was just introduced yesterday, but that was an admin bill that we put in. This is relating to declaring water shortage an emergency. So further dealing with this Red Hill disaster and issue, one of the things working with attorney generals is that the ability to Rehan Anbarghout, authority to declare an emergency. And so we there's language and amendments to the code to give the Commission that authority to deal with situations like this, hoping we don't ever have to use it. But and that we can anticipate shortage with better data and planning and proactive kind of research. But if we did need to use that, we'd have that tool available to us. That was in response to this Red Hill situation. Next slide. This is just a graphic of DLNR's overall CIP budget. I wanted to bring this up. So the greenish color is the two million in CIP for the monitoring well development. Last year we got a lump fund appropriation from the legislature, and as part of the cool down of the chair is to prioritize all of the CIP projects throughout the agency so fortunately, water commission has been able to stay on top of that table and get part of that lump sum of the portion of the 220 million so I just wanted to show graphically some of the things that we are also being balanced against with the overall agency. Next slide. And then lastly, the green administration had asked us for potential budget modifications or requested budget items. These actually, we added some, but some of these were part of our original EGAY administration ask apps but weren't actually in the governor's budget so what we did put it forward is we submitted a request to add seven new positions to groundwater and survey branch and that's really to kind of ramp up and meet the needs of some of our groundwater water work and our water use permit approvals and reviews dealing with red hill issues etc et cetera. I framed this under climate crisis research and monitoring, but it's really important that we start to put money towards this. And so we've asked for additional funding to add more streamgages to our system. USGS can only handle about five gauges a year. So we're asking for five every year. And the idea is just to keep asking for that every single year. It's still not gonna get us to build up for another couple of decades, but we're hoping that we can beef that up and partner with USGS and working with our congressional delegation to increase the federal resources in that program as well. LIMU research, we've been working with Water Research Center at University of Hawaii, DAR, to kind of rift off of ANCUA that was just presented here to build off of the year of LIMU and actually look at how groundwater, especially groundwater-dependent ecosystems and the research that they've done in Keauhou onho on Mim큰, if we can start to partner with them because that is the next kind of thing that we have to really understand is how groundwater affects near shore ecosystems and our near shore environments as another public trust use of water. And then to support our work with Water Resource Research Center funding to help with the management of the Hawaii MESA net program through the Hawaii climate data portal. Then one push that's here that I think we need to take that off because it didn't get in, but we've been talking about in order to shorten that timeframe of 100 years if we develop a demodering well every year, every other year, we have to just do more and um we're wanting to increase that to five to ten to five ten million but we're also looking at federal funding resources to hopefully supplement our double down on our state budget that we do get allocated here so that's generally our budget um the the omit the increase of five million a year that didn't make it into the cip um sorry that was a typo that didn't get there get changed out before we ended but that's it I think those that's the last slide um any questions from commissioners or EGs on budget and like lean yeah very lean very where we are trying to be optimistic with governor green's commitment to climate change to utilize you know that we need to be prepared from the water commission side to you know address some of commissioner katayama's question about being more proactive what can we do in light of climate change? And I think we need to be situated to take advantage of both federal funds as well as the governor's commitment to climate change. So. But I do want to use our public, our Water Commission meeting also as a public forum as appropriate legislation arises to bring that to the commission's attention as well as the public's attention so that we create a forum for public to provide us testimony or comments on proposed legislation so any comments from the commissioners before we look at our final schedule and adjourn? Any final, oh, Commissioner. Can you hear me now? Yes, we can. Okay. Just a quick one. I know this is constrained with the practicality of the budget, but two questions one um where in your positions is there a point person or people to interface with doh as we have joint responsibilities is there that position and two you know um are there positions that do not yet exist in divisions that may not exist that would be ideal to have just so we keep in mind the ideal capacity of seaworm versus the current, you know. Yeah, no, that's a great question. We haven't, I will say, we haven't dreamt yet about what the ideal seaworm function and real full buildout would look like because it's you're really quickly reminded in government like you that's too big and too much and so I hear what you're saying and one of the things you know at least in these next four years I'm committed to is helping to support staff to build their capacity and get more bodies in and part of that is growing smartly in a smart way when you throw massive lumps of money and resources the training the onboarding that really change in culture is is a shock and so what we're proposing or what i've been proposing with staff is these realistic requests for staffing and budget so we can grow smart um and help to build that capacity over time. And so what you're seeing is some of where we, talking with staff, where we believe we need to focus right now to meet current needs, but also will help to build capacity in the long term, in the long game. So that's my short answer. With Department of Health, some of these groundwater, a lot actually, the groundwater team does interface very regularly with department of health um especially on their drinking water side um we work with planning does also take us takes a large uh role with coordinating the doh one of the things me and kathy have talked about as deputies in this next round or you know thanks for confirming me um is to really tighten up our doh and seaworm staff collaboration our processing and to really understand when who's on first and in certain situations and tighten up that relationship and even looking at funding opportunities right they have the revolving loan funds or revolving funds and whether or not those resources could be used and leveraged with CWRM's limited resources to align projects or move together in certain ways. So it's a long winded answer, but I think there's definitely enough momentum to better align the limited resources that we do have with the leadership that's in place. Right. Kathy and I are continuing on from last administration. So I think we can hit the ground running other unlike other departments that really have to kind of build that up that momentum up so I'm hopeful not putting Kathy on the spot but I think we can do good things together and keep up the momentum that we've created since last time no I appreciate the question too aurora i think there is this administration as well as our own internal is really committed to better internal coordination that we have to we have to be in sync there's really no reason because it all goes back to the public's trust when we aren't in sync it leads to public mistrust so i think this administration has really emphasized the need for greater coordination internally, both within your own agency and then externally with your sister agencies before we go out to the public. that also with respect to dll you know we have been living quite frankly over the last decade you know hand to mouth but there is going to be a great infusion of both federal funds and this administration as well as the legislature's commitment in particular through climate change for us to be at the lead of that so like like Kaleo said, we have to think big and we have to start planning. We have to look at planning, strategic planning over the next 10, 20 years. So all this emphasis on being more proactive, I mean, there is going to be a lot, a changing of a mindset internally at DLNR. We are generating, many of our divisions are generating revenue that they have not done before. So we are looking more strategically at the future. So we ask for your patience, but there is a desire to be much more efficient and effective with our resources so that we can do better with the general, for the general public. Chair, if I can real quick, just getting to the full build out kind of what resources and staff would be appropriate. The framework update to the Hawaii Water Plan. The Hawaii Water Plan is a tool and a mechanism and putting that out there as a fellow planner to really take that long-term perspective and build out to that. And I think once that framework update is completed and approved by this body, right, we're going to set the tone and the vision for the next 20, 30, 40, 50 years. Then we'll be able to figure out and determine what are the resources we need to accomplish those overarching long-term plan goals um and that framework is looking at things like climate change it is looking at things like place-based management and elevating tradition ecological knowledge and and practice of native wines um that holistic world view on water resource management so i think once that framework is solid and this body as a whole adopts it, then we can start to build out that team to accomplish those larger goals and visions. Okay, Aurora is your hand up? Yeah, final thing. This is me switching to my UH hat. I just want to put it out here while DOH and Seaworm are in the same room you know the university and especially some departments are undergoing this like big turnover and there's going to be a lot of hires in the next several years because people have retired during the pandemic and there will be new openings I think it would be a really good opportunity to make sure the university is engaged water resources is also rebuilding and and to think about that because there is I'm also part of a scoping effort to think about what are the pathways we need to place people in water professions and it's not just in engineering it covers a broad swath so to the extent possible please don't forget UH as part of your resource we've actually already engaged um president lassner about having more internships having having greater pathways so that you get trained here within dlnr so when positions become available there's a really nice smooth transition so if you have any internships or you know i mean we we are looking there's no reason why government should not be looking upon itself to provide a lot of these resources. So we can keep our local kids here. So yeah, we are committed just as you are to both the university as well as community colleges, and even high schools to start them on this pathway towards this conservation preservation movement. So thank you for that. So, and this is, I know we're 515, 15 minutes over. So. Okay, so just so you know, DOH is also looking at workforce development. So please send people our way as well. We're all tapping into the same people, but no, most definitely. Is one of those lays what all the employees at DOH get? Because, you know. Incentives. I don't know, she's guarding that. Your kneehouse shell lays, guarding that with your life. Beautiful, actually really beautiful so with that um kaleo our last to me we have our meeting schedule meetings um are there on the agenda okay um and then we'll be coordinating with your guidance on um some of the follow-up on that you wanted to hear yeah yeah and then um yep that's it for this meeting thank you so much for the flexibility on shifting to last tuesday versus the yeah no i appreciate that we've been kind of jamming on a lot of things but we did want to have a meeting this month so i appreciate everybody making it and this this concludes our meeting if there's no further business to discuss if i declare the meeting congratulations thank you everyone congratulations okay we'll see you next month