 okay we're live on youtube i think that's my cue i'm pounding table, pretending that it's the gavel. So I'm going to call this meeting to order. Aloha mai kakou. My name is Dawn Chang, and I am the chair of the Commission on Water Resource Management. I apologize for not being there in present, especially since this is the first meeting of our new commissioner larry miiki this is the january 26 2023 meeting of the commission on water resource management so sorry let me get my phone off um and it is 9 00 a.m We are holding this meeting as a hybrid meeting. Some of us are in person in the Kalani Moko building in the item you wish to testify on please remember to turn off your youtube when you are in the main zoom meeting room or we will get an echo when you enter please be sure to keep your camera off and microphone muted until the commission calls on your public testimony we ask that members of the public testifying on agenda items limit your testimony to 3 min so that we can get everyone. Please be mindful of everyone, those who are here to testify and remember not to use the chat for any comments. Because that presents a sunshine issue. People may also testify via telephone at the number posted. Please let our Commission Secretary, Kathy Yoda, know your name and what agenda item you wish to testify on so we can call on you for that item. You may also email your testimony via email, which we have received, kathy.s.yoda at hawaii.gov or to dlnr.seaworm at hawaii.gov. We will be having several presentations today. There will be no direct questions from the public to the presenters, only to the commissioners. And my intent is to provide the commission and the public with good, accurate, and current information, but in a safe environment without contention. So I really appreciate it. Those of you who have questions, you direct them to the Commission. For all meeting participants, I would ask that you stress that you speak slowly, clearly, and directly. I will now read the contested case hearing statement. In some matters before the commission, a person may wish to request a contested case hearing. If such a request is made before the commission's decision, then the commission will consider the request first before considering the merits of the item before. A person who wants to contest the case may also wait until the Commission decides the issue, then request to contest the case after the decision. It is up to you. Any request must be made orally by the end of the meeting and followed up in writing within 10 days. If no request for a contested case is made, the Commission will make a decision. The Department will treat the decision as final and proceed accordingly. In addition, the Commission may go into Executive Session pursuant to 92-5-A-4 Hawaii Revised Statutes in order to consult with its attorney on issues or questions pertaining to the Commission's powers, duties, privileges and immunities. I'd like to now take roll call of all the commissioners. I'd like to first start with those commissioners that are in the boardroom, and then we'll go on those that are that are here remotely. And I am sorry. So if you could, I do not see the boardroom. I don't have that screen. So whoever's sitting next to Kaleo, if you could start first. Larry Meike. Neil Hammons. Aurora Kagawa-Fediani. Kathleen Ho. And on remote, Wayne. Good morning, Wayne Kataeama, and here alone. And again, Don Shang, Chair, and I am here alone too. I would like us to all welcome Commissioner Larry Miiki for his first meeting before with the Commission. And again, thank you all for I'm hoping that I'm going to get this remote thing without too many glitches. I'd also like to introduce the staff and I don't and again I can't see everybody on the other side but we have Deputy Kaleo Manuel and Kathy Yota is our secretary and we have deputy attorney general Kalman Lau and as the staff present do their presentations I'll ask them to introduce themselves I'd like to do agenda items protocol we will hear items generally in the following order that's been posted on the agenda. Unless there's been a request for an item to be moved up. Ms. Yota, has there been any agenda items that have been withdrawn or asked to be moved up? No. All right. Thank you so much. So the first item on the agenda is the approval of the minutes of June, 2,023. Item name. Do you have any questions or comments? Yes, how are you doing this? So I just have non-substantive corrections. And Commissioner Viviani, will you provide those comments to the staff? Yes. Very good. Do I have any other comments from the commissioners? I don't hear or see any. Is there a motion? So moved. Motion has been made is there a second second all right a motion has been made and seconded to approve the minutes of june 20 of june 20th 2023 i'm going to since this is the first vote we will do it by roll call so uh kathy could you do the roll call please larry mcchristian oh since i wasn't here for that they'll just uh that's thing Aye. Aye. Aye. Aye. Thank you very much. I am sorry, I did want to say that we have one more Commissioner, Paul Meyer the agenda is item number b1 it is the navy navy region and navy facilities overviews updates of red hill remediation enclosure red hill shaft recovery and monitoring and monitoring well development and water data. I think General Hashimoto, you are at the table. Again, thank you very much. This is a second update to the Water Commission. We have greatly appreciated the Navy appearance before the commission intended to provide us some good information about the current status of the cleanup at Red Hill. So go go ahead general hashimoto if you could also introduce your staff uh aloha chair chang uh deputy chairman well commissioners ladies and gentlemen my name is major general mark hashimoto i represent the united states indo-pacific command and mahalo for this opportunity to provide updates on matters that are directly related to the water itself and that are also forward-looking we're going to provide updates on red hill site remediation enclosure shaft recovery and monitoring and monitoring well development as well as water data as chair chang mentioned the last time we were here was meeting on March 21st. During that meeting, we had a few follow-ups to besides providing a general update periodically, and those had to do with soil vapor extraction as well as GAC flow optimization. So those will be covered along as well as the general update as part of today's brief what i'd like to start with before we get into the specifics of the agenda item is i'd like to have the joint task force red hill provide an update on the defueling operations and we'll start with lieutenant colonel wino good morning i am the new staff task force i replaced colonel kevin williams who beat you last time in march although new to the position i am not new uh to the joint task force i joined the joint task force when it was stood up in september and i've been serving as admiral wade's executive assistant and a planner on the team thank you for the opportunity to provide an update as you know the mission is for the joint Task Force to safely and expeditiously defuel the Red Hill facility and to rebuild the trust with the people of Hawaii. When we assume this mission, Admiral Wade was committed to building a plan to iterate and increase our understanding of that plan to learn in partnership with the regulators find ways to help the process to start and finish earlier next slide please as you may remember this is our integrated master schedule and i want to draw your attention to the yellow box on the top from what we updated you left last time we are on plan to commence gravity defueling starting in august october of 2023 with the completion date of january of 2024. this is five months earlier than briefed last time this process will remove 104 million gallons or approximately 99 of the fuel in the facility we realize that there still remains a substantial amount of fuel approximately 100 000 100,000 gallons when we complete this phase. And we are, to be clear, we will remove every last drop of fuel from the facility. We are currently in planning to determine how best to safely and expeditiously remove that residual fuel. And we will add additional supplements to complete that plan that will address all actions to remove that fuel. I want to draw your attention to the plans line. A couple of key points along this one. First in May, defuel supplement two was submitted by or was released by the department of defense on may 16th and that plan outlines how we are going to execute the fueling operations on this accelerated timeline since that release it has since been approved by the department of health and the environmental protection agency moving a little bit further to the right in july you'll see a decision point for tankers for the october start date we did in fact meet all conditions for that decision point navarro aquilino informed the secretary of defense and also the defense logistics agencies to move forward with the contracting actions to have tankers online for this accelerated start date. I'm moving down to the response line down in July. You'll see a fueling spill. That was our final interagency exercise that we just completed on the 13th of this month. We are currently training our roving security and fire watch teams to complete a culminating capstone event. You can move a couple diamonds to the right for the fire watch capstone event in August, which we conducted on the 16th and 17th. I'm moving down towards the bottom on the NEPA line. Since our last update, we completed the 30-day public comment period in June, and we are on track to complete the nipa process by the end of august moving up one to the ops line we completed the dewatering process which as you may remember removes water from the tanks and the pipelines to prevent corrosion and to ensure the quality of the fuel a little bit to the right there we did complete tank tightness testing which ensures the integrity of the tanks a little bit further to the right there in july we are currently in the process of draining the surge tanks we should be complete sometime next week. This process will remove 480,000 gallons of fuel from the facility. Each of these evolutions are meticulously planned, trained to rehearse Response drills are exercised, and they are all each approved by the regulators before execution we are currently in the process of that same methodology for the next one as you can see if you go down from the august time frame for repacking repacking will be conducted at the end of august and it will be the first time that we reintroduce fuel into the pipelines, starting from the Joint Base Pearl Harbor Hickam side up to the Red Hill facility. Since we actually unpacked the lines, if you may remember back in October, November of last year. And last on this slide, moving up to the repair and maintenance, you'll see in June, the DOD repairs need to be complete. In July, the third party quality validation items need to be complete. And then August, repair approval received, which comes from the Department of Health. Next slide, please. This is our- Chair Chang. Chair Chang, ma'am. Yes, please go ahead. Is it now? Before you leave the slide, Lieutenant Colonel Wymer, thank you for using the dashboard and keeping the goalposts in place so we can see our progress toward the end line. I have two questions. What about that 6% of the fuel that you can't defuel immediately makes it problematic why is that a problem um it's not necessarily a problem in terms of um it just randomly now it just takes a long time to remove because it's uh stuck in pipelines at bends or low points um it takes a different process than gravity to remove it i see thank you and with your respect to your nepa public comment can you give a high level summary of what the comments of the public were and what your responses were um there were i want to say approximately 20 comments of which I remember right I think six were substantial and that process for reviewing those comments and addressing each of those concerns is ongoing so it was the nature of the six that were I'd have to come back to you with those specifics Yes, I see Aurora. Yeah, well we're also still on this slide. What, and I don't know if this is in your purview, but what kind of monitoring and surveillance is there to see quickly identify potential spills you know with repacking and refueling is that yeah okay so that roving security and fire watch team that i mentioned that we're currently training that team will be a 68 person element that will be in the facility 24 7 roving so coming up and down the pipelines, so that we can identify if there is a problem quickly and then take action as required. When you refer to facility, do you mean just around the tanks or does that facility include all of the pipelines all the way down to the piers. Okay, and those are. If I could add in addition to that we are continuing continuing with the groundwater monitoring that is occurring as well as the soil vapor monitoring that is occurring within the vicinity of the tank yeah so my understanding is that is again around the tanks but there's potential for it's human expanded the original were all within the tank gallery but it has expanded okay too okay one other aspect ma'am if you may remember we we have increased our video monitoring system as well we've supplemented what was in the facility with some new purchases so we can, supplement our roving security wash with a little bit more camera ability. If I can also turn to DOH, and is DOH working? DOH side. DOH is working along with EPA and they are training, they go through the same exercises with EPA and DOH along with the Navy. Thank you. Yeah, I have a question. You said a 68 team roving, a 68 person- Roving security and fire watchers, ma'am. Is that per shift or is that in total? That's in total. The shifts will be broken down into multiple teams. Each of them will have a lead who is a subject matter expert in that field. And then each of them are going through our training process right now. And they're gonna be responsible for different sectors. um and then uh each of them are going through our training process right now and they're they're going to be responsible for different sectors when the team is on each person will be identified into a certain section yes um and then obviously when the new team comes on they will cover the same areas thank you another one then while we're at it. So that is, I'm assuming that means like 24 hour coverage. Any other questions from the commissioners before we move on this slide? All right. Thank you. Go ahead. This is our defueling dashboard we update this. Every other week and it's posted to our website and to our. enjoy your attention to the Center of the slide where you see the four pages, this is how you can track our progress to maintain our trajectory for the early mid-October start date. So on the far left, working left to right, you'll see that we have completed all 253 mandatory repairs as planned. We are complete with 246 through the third-party quality validation program. And all 246 of those packets have been submitted for to the Department of Health for their review and approval. Finally, on the far right, you'll see that the Department of Health has conditionally approved 178 of those packets that we've submitted to you. We feel like we're in a good place between us and the regulators, and we are on glide path to maintain a early start date of October 2023. Last highlight on this slide is in the bottom right. You'll see two QR codes. These are to our apps to help you download them so that you can receive information and updates and track our progress as we defuel the facility. In summary, we still have a lot of work to do, but we are on plan to start defueling early on a mid-October start date. I wanna thank you for the time to provide you this update, depending on your questions and that. Thank you. Does anybody have, any commissioners, do you have any questions? time to provide you this update um depending on your questions and that thanks um does anybody have any commissioners do you have any questions can i just ask actually kathy ho this is a question i have for you what's doh's capacity to review all of these the documents and materials that are being submitted to you for review we have a small but dedicated team um and we are on track for an august dead i think it's august 6th deadline to have reviewed and uh all of the packets that have been submitted to us thank you lots just with regard to the nipa comments and your response uh since i don't know when you're coming before the commission again can you get that work with our staff to get that to them and they can get that information to us of course any other comments commissioners questions I don't see any hands. Okay, General Hashimoto is there's any other updates. Yes, we do like to pass it on to Don here and introduce himself and talk about tank closure plan timelines and status. check thank you good morning everybody and thank you for appreciating the invite down here today i'm donald pantin i work for navy region hawaii um overseeing the tank closure plan for navy region hawaii on the slide you're seeing right now is a brief synopsis of all the products we have submitted along the timeline that we have spit at them uh we are making progress going forward we're working with the regulators uh through ongoing meetings responding to the requests for additional information so we can apply uh provide them with amplifying information to make informed decisions we're on a good glide path right now and we are moving the tank plan to closure plan forward as you're aware we're we're still in the planning phase of the tank closure plan and it's scheduled to start once the fueling is completed the physical aspect of it i'll pause there on this slide for any questions if you can highlight supplement two yes something new and supplement two is one release since the last time um this uh group met and that would provide an amplify information and closure in place which is a recommendation for the tanks in addition to the structural analysis report and we responded to epa's uh rfis on the tank closure plan all this information which you'll see on the next slide um is in the i'll pause there any questions on this slide commission. Any questions on this slide? Commissioners, any questions on this slide? I don't see any hands. Go ahead, Donald. The next slide. Next slide, please. This is just a graph that you've seen before. There's no stringent change in the graphic. The tank closure plan is broken down to four phases. Phase one and phase two are in progress right now, which is a planning effort. Phase three and phase four will commence progress right now, which is a planning effort. Phase three and phase four will commence once the fueling is completed. That's a physical aspect of the tank closure plan. Also like to note right down here in the bottom middle right there is also a QR code. All information and tank closure plan. Also anything related to Redhill and other websites or via the qr code all this information we're showing here today of all the plans the supplementals requests for information our responses to the request for our information all posted on the public facing website via that qr code commissioners any questions on this slide? Commissioner Viviani? I think my question is addressed on the next slide. Next slide, please. This is all the tank closure plan. This is phase two of the tank closure plan that may be contracted out for public outreach on beneficial non-fuel reuse this is phase two basically uh what we need to do in phase two is identify evaluate and discuss options uh with a public outreach program um for the state of hawaii nakapu is doing this effort for us um it's broken down in three phases initially there was an open survey requesting any feedback at all of any recommendations uh anybody might have the second uh part of this was one-on-one interview with key stakeholders across oahu oahu which has been completed and the third phase which will be going out then in this month um is a mail um survey to particular area codes uh zip codes here within oahu all this information will be comprised into a final report that final report will be publicly posted and released via our website the public final report will also be briefed at the fall ftac this year yes so how did you identify? Sorry. No, no, no. Go ahead. Can you describe how you identified the key stakeholders? The key stakeholders were brought in from many aspects of a lot of them were recommendations going from people that have had a lot of involvement with Red Hill overall, some people that have R. Stan Williams' so these are organizations organizations or individuals they've been uh key stakeholders uh organizations companies or just private citizens including um groups that were highly critical sierra club was included that man and also border water supply okay any other questions oh yes neil go. What criteria have you identified to be employed to make the decision as to your first? Okay, So i'll stand upon this a little bit the tasking for the tasking to us in the tank closure plan was to go up and identify and evaluate options. Take this forward. Honestly, there's three independent efforts going on in reference to beneficial reuse. There's the NDAA effort looking at DoD reuse. There's- National Defense Authorization Act. Which was being led, which is independent of this one, this effort here, and also the Office of Naval Research gave a grant to university of hawaii to look at non-fossil fuel possible reuse all these three independent efforts are going to be consolidated into a final report the latter part of this year and they'll be briefed to congress in february 2024. coming out of congress those next steps i don't have all those next steps at this time but i know uh finally it will be engagement between the department of defense and the state of hawaii on what the options future options could be but there must be some criteria for analysis yes cost time safety public so can you elucidate this so when we get all the options in i'll say this will be a handful they have merit and the ones that have decided deemed they have merit are going to go for a feasibility analysis because they have merit and the ones that have decided deemed they have merit are going to go for a feasibility analysis because they have merit doesn't mean the environmental approved or utility point of uh approval structural so that we're going to have to do a final feasibility analysis that feasibility analysis will narrow down the list of options that are feasible have merit and that are feasible to implement. You're giving me process, but I'm not hearing the substance of the criteria like such as time, feasibility and sustainability. So what sustainable what is sustainability? It can it's something that can be sustained politically, environmentally, financially in the long term. And do you think that's reflective? politically, environmentally, financially, in the long term. And do you think that's reflective, those criteria are reflective of the concerns of the public that you're getting from Nakupuna or any other public input process? Yes, a lot of the feedback we got, sir, is something that would not support, benefit the state of Hawaii. That could be from a usage point of view, an economic point of view. As the also the feedback, it has to be 100% environmental compliance and protect the environment. So those are, I'll say, themes are coming back. Yeah, I think that's what we're asking here. Yes, sir. I think over time, it's a really good question because what we're talking about is what are the criteria as you bring up, and then as with any sort of decision of this magnitude, it's the weighting of each criteria and so i think this uh this effort to get as much input as possible would get i think in what you're talking about because while many of these uh these are all important decision-making criteria there are some i think that would be reflective of what the public would expect. And so again, we're just in the data collection phase and as we move into later decision making, I think absolutely these kinds of formalizing the decision criteria will come in. If it's as Lieutenant Wanger, Lieutenant Colonel Wanger said, you want to rebuild trust, I think that there needs to be some transparency about that. The fear of somebody who doesn't trust assumes that maybe it's not their interest as being less prioritized. It's money or it's something else. So if you lay those cards out on the table and we talk about the prioritization, I think it's's uh it's a more transparent and so there'll be a balance obviously and i think that's uh it'll all be for all to see it is a balance you know as i think we could appreciate uh it's not it probably won't be formulaic you know if you will but uh thank you general hashimoto can i ask you who will ultimately make the decision on the reviews? This is Donald Panthan. I can see the decision will between the Department of Defense engaging with the State of Hawaii, engaging with the state of hawaii why there'll be a very senior uh meetings going back and forth of this uh the ones that have merit and that are feasibly uh capable and there'll be some discussions uh between the department of defense and the state of hawaii to pursue um an ultimate solution and recommendation is the state state of Hawaii the governor? Is that the state of Hawaii? Under ordinary circumstances, when we're dealing with an underground storage tank, it would be the Department of Health. Obviously the Department of Health would reach out to other agencies within the state of Hawaii and have discussions with members of the public as well. I have two questions maybe for you first following that and then for Mr. Panthen. So given that would the process for public input then be through FTECH because DOH, you know, doesn't have like C1, a regular open process for helping make that kind of follow-up decision? Or is there going to be another mechanism? You know, we haven't really thought that through yet because we still have to see what is the outcome. But we will be seeking some public input either through F tack or some some other reaching out. I concur Kathy, you know, we have quarterly meetings to be transparent with the public. Two of them a year at the FTAC, the other two of the years with Navy working with the regularity of some of the public meetings and that as we progress forward that'd be a great topic. Yeah in addition there was a settlement a consent order with the federal government, EPA, and the Navy and others. And on Thursday, they are going to be convening their first meeting of... This is a community- Community outreach and engagement involvement, right. So that's also a good forum to talk about uh the reuse of the tanks well i have a question before yes sir for the department of health when you say you're you're going to be the decision maker you really mean the governor right the governor of the legislature because this is a political issue i mean i know you're the technical agency, but when you say that, you're not the ultimate decision. I would say we would have discussions with everyone about the room. But I'm asking who makes the final decision. It's not DOH, right? I used to be in DOH. I understand. I used to work for you when I was in DOH. And you were my client when you were the director. So I understand when you understand the political nature of this. So yes. That's why I asked the question, because it's not that's going to be DOH dealing with the Department of Defense, which is kind of an unequal partnership, which I accept. I just want a clarification is that i know politics will be involved and ultimately i think it's going to be either the governor or i i hope the legislature doesn't get involved in this you know just complicate it uh but but it's more common okay but i think that's the value of transparency. If we give the criteria on the table and the analysis is applied in an ethical and open way to each option, then everybody can see. And somebody's going to make that call who has the authority. But the consequences of the call will be clear, and there'll be some accountability. Well, I think both DOH and the Navy. In a perfect world. I got you. Okay. Will Congress have a role in this or is that going to ultimately be DOD? Do you know, General Hashimoto? Congress is going to have a role in the decision. Ma'am, I'll tell you you i'm unclear on that right now i think that will be one of the outcomes of the brief to congress in february 2024 so we'll have to follow up on that at that point in time very good just cost money that's not in a normal budget wouldn't that money be coming from congress all depends on if you're talking about what is the final solution or recommendation for benefits any solution would have to be funded any solution it could be a state it could be dod it could be a corporate so it would have to be funded and so when we come down to that short list of options um that will have to be taken into consideration at that point in time because it might be a great option or recommendation but if you can't get funded just i'm making this up right now the 2035 then maybe you might want to go with a different solution at that point in time but that will be a future product well i think the navy is getting a real clear message if you can kind of include include this on your regular updates to us you know know, just the more transparency, the criteria that Neil is talking about and process and substance. But I don't think the intention isn't to have all the answers today, but clearly we are looking at sort of the bottom line, who makes the ultimate decision on this very important issue of the reuse of those facilities. Any other questions aurora go ahead i just have a second question for mr crumpton which was if you could recap the three parallel efforts um nash that happening ndaa national defense authorization act um onr has funded uh i've not heard of that um for non-fossil fuel reuse and then this. And then Nakapuna. Nakapuna. So given that, I guess, having worked with community, sometimes the perception can be that people's input will be considered in its full entirety. And the reality is that it would be weighted. Do people who are participating in these engagements understand that i think some more than others ma'am i i would say uh we collected uh probably about a thousand just open surveys uh from the website there's another about uh 40 interviews and we're expecting another a couple of thousand from the mail order coming in so you could have a wide range of recommendations there. And other wide range of recommendations, there's a long going to come down a short list of a two, three or four that ultimately get, have merit and for strong consideration of the final product. So we consider everything, and this is why it was open for a wide range. Not only do we get a lot of recommendations, but going back to criteria saying, some people say we don't care what it is, as long as it has this criteria in there to make sure the environment is protected and other things so we're collecting all this data information when the data collection phase right now so as we synthesize all this information and move forward we will have better clarity on the next steps but you're right with all these recommendations it's going to be a 99 of the recommendations won't be selected it's going to be a 99 percent of all the recommendations won't be stuck it's going to be narrowed down to a couple and there are some i'll say recommendations that are consistent between multiple individuals making their submissions okay so what is the process we we heard about the process for the selection will be based on certain criteria but what's the process for shortlisting because based on certain criteria but what's the process for shortlisting because there's a lot of stuff that can drop out well that's going to go all this can be consultant okay so that consolidate brief is not coming from here okay all these three inputs are being fed back into on dc okay dc will be consolidated folks in dc will be consolidated this report later this year. They're working on criteria how they're gonna approach that right now. I'm not involved in that at this point in time, but that's what they're gonna be doing to make the recommendations to the final brief to Congress in February 24. Is there, and is the CRY part of that process in DC or can it be? And I'm just asking because in like planning and participatory theory, there's rungs of engagement and consultation is sort of the lowest. And then like community decision-making is the highest. And the reality is it's gonna be somewhere in between. So is there, you know, in this process, and it's really important for building trust to have more than that. So are you sort of engaging with those those ideas of maybe shifting in order to build trust the level of um sort of community say and and at least that shortlist so we do greet the community any scenario open house we go to matter of fact uh we just came up with a new flyer that is i mentioned the mail survey going out the end of this month it's been targeted to uh zip codes throughout oahu we have a flyer for that we go to neighborhood boards maybe two or three weeks two or three per week and we're presenting this in the neighborhood boards as kathy just mentioned that we have this initiative kicking off this thursday within cri which is community relations um a team which will be a a small group okay uh people that are interested in red hill which we'll be talking about the progress towards red hill overall being environmental tank closure plan and beneficial non-review reuse and they will be maybe meeting twice per quarter in addition to all the other public meetings or public outreach um so there's a lot of opportunities we have we do go out and speak to the public about where we're going in the process and the next steps right but still very well this is broader right now because all these three efforts are in the data collection phase. So until we get all the data in, that will help us narrow down some of the criteria in the next steps of how to synthesize that data, represent it, and present it. So it's like almost like a scattergram right now, collecting all the data, and which will inform and help formalize how it's consolidated and sorted. Yeah, I guess I'm thinking if just as you move along, considering how much say, it's probably very different than how Navy normally operates. But if the objective is to also build trust, then that feedback needs to come back. Because if you've taken a lot of people's time to get input and then don't take it into account, that actually puts you in a worse place afterwards because there's deeper cynicism. So I think we'll have more clarity by the fall FTAC 2, which will be presenting this final brief from Nakapuna of all their results and hopefully communicate some of the next steps that we'll follow on after that yeah and so that's hopefully that's one avenue but whatever we do at the uh uh ftac we have the same material that we use for community boards and other public meetings in addition to that so people will see it in different places yeah and all this information i'm speaking of is currently uh with in reference to nakapuna the survey results that we've received so far uh who are the people that we interviewed one-on-one yeah uh for the one-on-ones that's all on the public-facing website right now through that qr code i showed you on the previous slide so all this is out there available to the public today for what's going on with this effort it does not elaborate the other two efforts that i told you spoke of because those are independent until they get completed we'll get the final information for those two and when the final report is publicized and i guess after the brief to congress that will also be posted here too okay thank you for explaining this it does help okay thank you yes neil go ahead it strikes me that this briefing of congress is very important in terms of creating their impression of the status of these of the issues and and uh their background we is that an independent briefing is it the navy telling its story to congress or will it be reflective of department of health and state interests sure i'll get you more information on exactly who's going to be presenting the brief itself but it's going to be presenting the brief itself but it's going to be input from those three uh independent efforts going on right now so it's not going to be uh navy's or a point of view it's going to be the collective point of view of all the input we received and recommendations that we received regardless of the source of that so unless you're going to have a representative team presenting to congress there probably should be a process to see what you're going to say so that doh and sea worm and other door to water supply can look at it and say yep that's you got it that's what's going on here uh so we all feel like and congress has been given an accurate uh view of all the parties so So are you saying, in other words, sorry, Chair Chang. No, go ahead, Kathleen. In other words, are you suggesting that they present us the findings prior to the report so we would have comment on it? I'm not sure who summoned how this briefing occurs, whether anybody can jump on the agenda, but if we're not on the agenda, if it's just the Navy, then I think some prior, before that occurs, whether anybody can jump on the agenda. But if we're not on the agenda, if it's just the Navy, then I think some prior, before that occurs, some prior discussion with these parties and stakeholders would be healthy, if not required, at least be healthy and transparent so that we understand, yep, you've got our position accurately captured. OK, sir. I'll write accurately captured. Okay, sir. I already doubt action item for myself. I don't think I don't have an answer for that right now. I sleep. I don't think we're going to brief the Congress is going to be released intact before it goes to Congress. Okay, but I think discussions could probably take place prior to that. General Hashimoto, I think we agreed on like quarterly updates. So this is July. I think the next update would be very close to your, I guess it's October? October, July, September. Yeah, maybe October. We'll come back with whatever frequency you require, Chair Chang. Okay, yeah, I think we were looking at quarterly updates, so maybe the next one would be back in October, and hopefully you'll have some greater updates. I was also hoping, you know, I think you're getting sort of an inclination from this commission about the desire to be transparent. I've greatly appreciated the updates you've provided us, you know, sort of the candor in your process. It is so much better when you say, if you don't know, don't, you know, don't make up something, but that you'll come back to us. So again, we hope, you know, please come back to us. But in the desire for transparency, I am hoping that after the report on your findings in the outreach, that report is broadly distributed to everyone who participated and more so that they have an opportunity to provide you comments on the report as well. I think in the past we have had other very important issues where we've had minority reports that go up that the report is you know reflects the authors and it may be a majority report there may be something there's an opportunity for someone who a group or you know entities who disagree to submit at least at least where there's additional comments or minority port report. But please think about that as a way to continue ongoing transparency as providing us another opportunity, us being the community. Another opportunity to weigh in on the report that it does reflect the communities's both process and substance yes dan and what i can promise you is when nakapuna's report is final we'll have a press release announcing that it's final along with the website was publicly posted also there will be an email address if anybody has any question for information on my clarity or follow-up any point i will take all those uh all those requests and I will respond to them and all the responses to anybody's questions I will also post on the public website for everybody's information so I can give them excellent thank you yes Larry oh since I'm new to this process um this kind of briefing where else have you been giving this to the reason i ask is that um the questions from the commissioners are like we want to be able to disseminate the information to as many people as possible but i want to know is is this commission the proper one or the one that's been doing this or is there other places that you've been i'll take that uh there have been multiple venues where this team has presented information you've already heard about the attack that's pretty well known there's a house special committee on red hill there's a governor's uh commission on water and there's also uh defueling specific defueling information sharing forum as well as the uh all of the organizations have public facing websites and the ability to interact uh at any time okay i appreciate that because my impression was the questions were being asked by the commissioners as uh as the as like you guys got to go out there and do more. I just want to know if this is the main forum or do you have many forums? I'd say it's one of many that is attended by many of the commissioners here that have been on. I couldn't respond though. I mean, part of the feedback that we've gotten loud and clear and regularly from the public. I have a hard time understanding what you're saying. I have small kids who have germs so um um so a lot of the feedback that we have gotten from the public from day one has been that the commission's regular open meetings have provided an important forum for exchange and questions at a time that um there wasn't all of this public kind of facing organized communications. So we still get, you know, sort of that push from those who provide testimony to ensure that that transparency happens. So it's good that it's happening through other forums now and with more regularity. Thank you. And Larry, if I can just add to aurora's comments it was really i mean i have since i've come on board as chair tried to use both the water commission and the land board as an opportunity for a public forum because we are one of the few agencies that actually open our meetings to the public it was designed to create a safe space for informed decision-making, permitting issues before they are controversial, including the Navy, an opportunity. And General Hashimoto has been extremely cooperative and willing to do that. So it is, and we've asked for a comprehensive update, not just on defueling, but on all of the aspects. So I think the intention for sea worm was, while some of these things may be out of our regulatory lane, it is nonetheless a public platform that the community can look both at our minutes and review our transcripts and can also participate in our process through either YouTubing or coming and providing comments. So that's kind of the, you know, the impetus of this. But I do know that the Navy has been having numerous meetings. I don't know how coordinated everyone is, but this has been just our platform to create another space for good information before decisions are being made okay i'm glad about that clarification because what i'm looking at is that we are the water commission and my focus is on water issues yeah and so i i don't want to get into a ride ranging things where we're we're basically looking at stuff that we shouldn't be looking at um but as long as they want to be uh willing to provide information to us and as long as some of the commissioners think it's important that we be the conduit for the public i'm fine with that but i want want to remind everybody that we're at a water commission. Appreciate that reminder, Larry. I think that the commission is clear what our role is, but I think we also, many members of the commission, hear public comments, and General Hashimoto and his team has been willing to utilize our meeting as as an opportunity for good accurate current information on a regular basis also i think i'd be remiss if i didn't add the open houses that these organizations hold as well as using the city and county's neighborhood board system uh to get the information out and i would like to say uh as valuable as it's been for us to be able to push information to the public and the Commission via this meeting, I can speak for everyone here today. The insights that we have gained from your comments have been invaluable. And so making sure we meet the accuracy and completion standards, we wouldn't have that without that kind of interaction. So i'll for your input. Okay, great any other questions and Jenna Hashimoto. Do you have more presentations? Oh, absolutely, Chair. I'd like to turn it over to the ceremony to continue information about the uh remediation efforts good morning my name is sarah uh i appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today i work for naval facilities engineering command hawaii overseeing the red hill environmental work that we're doing dedicated to the red hill project specifically i would like to speak to you today about water quality and efforts the navy continues to do to ensure our water quality for our distribution system and do what we can to kind of protect and monitor and make sure that we're doing everything we can to keep doing the safe drinking water currently we are in period six of a seven period commitment that the navy made in March of 2022 to collect 7800 drinking water samples from the distribution system for the purpose of identifying clean water in locations, making sure that the recovery that we had done following the water crisis in November of 2021 had sustained and that we had no ongoing issues in the water system, as well as to build public confidence in the drinking water system by creating an avenue which we were consistently collecting data and posting it publicly and interacting with residents in the community to continue to show that the drinking water is safe so so far we have collected 6 300 samples of drinking water that has been from residents and facilities throughout the distribution system. And we also have several locations where we continue to collect samples on a periodic basis repetitively, such as all of our schools, all of our child development facilities, our medical facilities, and any other high-risk locations. So we do that with the purpose of making sure that we are showing that the water is safe especially for communities for at-risk populations such as our cake so um all that data is posted online and it continues to be shared we continue to see that the water remains safe to drink we have not had a a detection of JP5 of Jekyll since we began the long-term monitoring program. And we continue to look at those results. And if we identify any concerns, such as an exceedance like lead, is immediately dealt with. The families provided bottled water or the school or whatever of that nature. And we do the process to remediate and close out that exceedance so in addition to uh long-term monitoring and then the monitoring we're doing for total petroleum hydrocarbons or a fuel we have also sampled our yava shaft our primary source which is our sole source right now for the drinking water system for pfas to guarantee that we don't have pfas in our drinking water and to guarantee that's not't have PFAS in our drinking water and to guarantee that's not an area of concern for our drinking water constituents. And so that result was non-detect. We were able to verify that the drinking water is non-detect for PFAS. We also continue to make sure we're sharing our data in a variety of avenues. So we've created a website called Safe Waters, which is a sharing website that the Navy has utilized to make available the data to all members of our community. So we are able to share the data in a variety of avenues. We have data reports or files, so the actual laboratory reports from the files shared in a library. We have data summary reports at the end of each period to be able to attempt to better explain the data that residents in the community are looking at, help them explain what that means to them and how it's relevant. And then we also have an interactive map, which allows residents or business owners or community members to look up an address and be able to see the data history from that specific location and some of the feedback we've heard specifically is to make things like school names easy to search so that a parent that has a student in school can easily look up that school name and identify what what the safety of the water at their child's school is and things of that nature so in addition to these efforts we also wanted to continue to promote the public outreach the community outreach so we've been setting up booths and uh things like the the naval exchange facility and the lobby area which is open to the public uh for people to interact with what drinking water experts be able to look up their results, ask questions, find out more information about the work that we're doing. We also are working with our schools, hoping this fall to set up those similar booths at maybe some back to school events or open houses so that parents of students help build confidence in the drinking water for their children, can interact, ask questions, and get information about the water. So those are just some of the efforts that we're doing to continue to show the water is safe and to also basically hold to our commitment that we were going to continue to sample the water. In addition to all the efforts we're doing here, we continue to pursue sampling at the Navy IAO Halawa shaft. It is our current shaft that is offline. It's been offline since December 3rd of 2021. However, we felt it was important to build data history for that location. And so starting September of 2022, we began doing every two to three weeks of flushing to overland for about 15 to 20 minutes for the purpose of collecting samples from that location to build data history so that we could see uh what the water quality is like in that location for future discussions with our regulators about reuse of that location so that's just some of the things we're doing in regards to our drinking water and captain sullivan will share more about our remediation efforts and other environmental and if I could also on this same topic that we do have as Sarah mentioned all of the testing going on we also have a retina response team that is available if any resident has a concern about their water quality if they're seeing anything unusual they can call over to our emergency operations center and then we'll dispatch a team to go look at the quality as well as take samples for an initial sample and then we'll add them to make sure their location gets included within the period within the next few days for the long-term monitoring so that we can get those results so that remains in place all times yeah these this these are your tactics uh what indicators are you uh using to determine whether your tactics. What indicators are you using to determine whether your tactics are successful? That the public feels a sense of high confidence in drinking that water. So that's a challenging data point to track. Obviously we'll continue to take feedback from community if they're drinking bottled water, if they're not using their water for not using their water is that something where we can have conversations actually go into their home and look at the water in their home and see if there's specific issues that can be addressed um we have seen a distinct down down shift in reports and calls of concerns and things like that over the last six months or so and so we hope that's indicative that people are starting to have confidence in their water again um but the challenge with public trust is that's a hard thing to quantify and so all we can continue to do is to act to show sustained that we continue to hold to our word but uh the best reports and the gauge i have is my interactions with the community and if i could add to that at a lot of these town hall events and our booths at different locations we will have individuals that come up very concerned very emotional at times and take the time we walk through we explain the results we answer all the questions and most of those interactions do leave with that individual feeling like they got their questions answered and at least understanding you know sometimes sometimes we can't pull back and restore that full trust but we at least by the the mood by the way those interactions go and what might start as a very tense interaction um we do our best and receive indications that when that individual finally does leave the table, the booth, and the discussion, they seem to be satisfied and understanding what we're doing. As imperfect as any measure might be, I think making an effort to just kind of identify some things that you're tracking and seeing the delta over time, I think would be beneficial healthy yeah so with what frequency are you um is this is the questions we get so with what frequency is the navy testing for pfas so currently we have tested the yabba shaft a single time under the UCMR5, the basically unregulated contaminants program under the EPA. And so we will collect another sample this fall, seven months after that sample to verify that. We do not currently sample for PFAS within the distribution system, just because of the sensitivity of that testing procedure and the risk of cross-contamination because PFAS is so prevalent in all sorts of things in our community, popcorn packaging and Teflon pans and things like that. So we've prioritized those efforts on the sources, both the Navy IAEA of La La Shep has been tested as well as the La La Shep. I have a follow-up then. So by that token, you are using epa what is it method what methods are you are being used sorry so there are two separate method groups for pfas yeah we for the lava shaft and the navy idea hall of shaft we use method 537.1 and 533 which are the epa drinking water methods for other p PFAS efforts that we've done in the area, such as following the AFFF release or at the Red Hill Shack, we use method 1633, which is the method that's been identified for environmental sampling. And to follow on to Kathy's question on for the PFAS sampling, we do continue to monitor and sample for the groundwater monitoring wells in the vicinity of the AFFF release in November of 22. So those are collected. It was weekly for the first six months after the release, and it is now to monthly testing of those monitor wells in that vicinity for PFS. I'm sorry, I asked because we know that those methods are limited to a certain set of known and regulated or not regulated, but like, you know, a subset of the possible substances that can occur. And so I guess, are you considering, that's a silly question but you know are there other methods that are coming online that are not regulatory or not i guess um epa approved yet such as aof or tof that really look at like the full you know you might have a contaminant event and then it breaks down into other compounds that are still potentially harmful but um i and i'm saying this for the public too like that our knowledge of how to regulate and monitor pre-fast is evolving but what are you guys doing to think about how to protect um public health given um the potential uh for contamination absolutely so we continue to work with the regulators to sample whatever methods are kind of referred and asked of us from the regulators. 1633 did expand to 40 different PFAS analytes. So it is a more expansive comprehensive look. It has lower detection levels. And 537.1 and 533 combined give us a pretty complete picture of the primary group of PFAS. And also, under long-term monitoring, we're collecting for 60-plus analytes of all sorts of other constituents, such as volatile organic compounds and semi-volatile organic compounds and anything related to total petroleum hydrocarbons. So we were already doing a pretty comprehensive sampling program this is just adding those 40 pfas constituents in addition to that sampling and that frequency part of yava will be moving forward so yava is sampled every period our sources are sampled at the beginning of every period of long-term monitoring so we do a threat so there's seven periods in the plan so we do a kind of a baseline sample to make sure we're re-verifying that our source water is meeting safe drinking water standards and then we move forward through that period so we continue to sample the way out of a shaft and we're committed throughout the defueling process to be mindful of public trust in the community and needed to take a sample from the way out of a shack to continue to verify to the public that the water remains safe to drink because that location is six miles from right right okay any other questions thank you so much do you have um go ahead on the next slide, please. So my name is Captain James Sullivan, so I'm the commanding officer of Naval Facilities System Engineering Command Hawaii. I got an opportunity, I thank you for that opportunity last fall to also brief the Commission. And the slide you're looking at now is actually one of the results of that discussion, and not just with Sea Worm, but also discussions that I've had with Ernie Lau and many other key stakeholders. And that is to make sure that we have a very clear and transparent plan that's laid out so that you see all the activities that we're doing. It's updated and posted on our website, and you are able to hold us accountable just as we hold ourselves accountable for all of the actions that we're proceeding so while this focuses on the current remediation and recovery efforts that are going on we also have and the navy is committed to the long-term remediation of the site long after the fueling long after closure we know that we have that responsibility to remediate that site and those steps are beginning right now with some of these site assessments that are looking at the site in its entirety and all contaminants that may exist so we can have a plan for what our remediation effort will be for many many years in everything that we do you know my team is working directly with the doh the epa bws seaworm usgs and uh last fall, there have been a lot of additional forums. As the general mentioned, we're briefing at whether it be the Governor's Water Committee, but we've also started, there's SME round tables that are conducted at both the senior level, as well as the working level with the SMEs, where we're pulling in folks from your team, folks from Board of water supply again usgs university of hawaii all to sit down and talk about are our tactics working are there new issues that are arising or do we need to change something that we're doing right now i know it's received any feedback that they might be receiving from their constituents we also meet with ernie lau on a very regular basis i know that there are some times we don't see eye to eye on an issue, but we definitely talk it out and make sure we're hearing what his perspective is so that it could influence our decision and our way forward. So while I don't intend to go in great detail into everything on this slide, and this is what is posted on our website, and this is really the tool that I utilize every time i'm briefing in one of these major forums but i did want to call out a few key efforts that i know have been part of the discussions within this committee in the past and are very important to our continued success in the remediation of red hill so moving down to the first section is the monitoring and sampling effort that the first few blue and the bars below it those are all related to our continued sampling to make sure we know what's going on in the soil but also below the soil all around red hill the key area there is the monitoring well expansion we've committed to 22 additional monitoring wells this year we're making great progress on that we've already got 10 complete there are four in progress. Still have eight remaining. We also, on that effort, there will be another discussion in October with all of those SMEs, again, members from this commission, but also with DOH, EPA, and Board of Water Supply to talk about monitoring well locations that we currently are not proceeding with do we need to adjust where we're putting those uh to make sure we fully understand what what the water is underneath and the aqua parade is doing um captain excuse me oh captain could you sorry what's an sme i'm not a subject matter expert okay okay sorry sorry sorry sorry go ahead uh so one of while it's much lower on the slide deck here but what are we utilizing the data that we're getting for the monitoring wells it is to also make sure and conduct modeling so there are two parallel modeling efforts that we're proceeding with we have both the navy modeling effort where we're working with one of our contractors and have been for several years. And then there is an independent University of Hawaii modeling effort that we are supporting, giving them, make sure they have all of our data, any access, and helping them in any way we can. But that is a parallel modeling effort the University of Hawaii is doing to, again, make sure we understand what's happening below the surface where is the groundwater flowing another item i would like to talk about is you know we mentioned i think at the last c1 there was some discussion on what are your current actions the soil vapor extraction is a technology that we are proceeding with right now to where we're getting the the tunnel and the in the attic close to where um the nove the tunnel and the attic close to where the November 20 release occurred and close to the Red Hill shaft preparing getting the holes that we need and the equipment we need to do the soil vapor extraction where this is basically we're pushing air we've identified locations below this surface of the tunnel all the way to the top of the aquifer where we believe there may be fuel that's trapped within those those layers that's where we'll be pushing in air and pulling back air out there touching that air out to try and pull all of that fuel that might remain anywhere trapped within the soil so that effort is currently in progress we're getting the equipment ready we're getting everything we read need ready to uh to proceed with that we also have to be very careful that none of the efforts that we're doing now we are not going to do anything that could in any way slow down or impact the fueling operations so it is a little bit there are some pauses at times and there's a lot of working with the doh where we know a lot of people on their team that would be a reviewing and are working with this on these plans are also the same reviewers that are working on all of the defueling so a little bit of patience not moving as quickly as we would like but still an effort that we are fully pushing forward with um okay um quick one while you're in monitoring. So is the data from this new monitoring wells on the groundwater sampling? Yes, ma'am. And so one thing of note, just like Sarah had talked about the Safe Waters website, where we have interactive maps, all of the results are posted. We have developed a parallel site which is focused, we have one on drinking water, our distribution system, and then we have developed a parallel site which is focused we have one on drinking water our distribution system and then we have developed a similar site on all of the environmental the groundwater samples any soil samples and that is and that's where this remediation table is all on the environmental half we have an interactive map on that one as well where you can click on any monitoring well that's in the network and you can find out what the results were for that monitoring well but we also have all of the full detailed lab reports and everything posted on that site as well and that was one of the things that we worked very closely with ernie lao and the team to make sure that he had access to all of the results and everything that was required us and we continue to every day improve the quality of that site and the user-friendly testing thank you um with regard to this monitoring and sampling uh you're continuing to run the pumps and put the water into yava stream and there's been public concern about the effects of that water uh on the surface the surface water system itself as well as the life that's dependent upon it is that captured in the monitoring it's in in the monitoring but also uh one of the efforts that we that i was going to talk about here in just a moment was about halfway down the slide under the added three remediation efforts the second the first and second bullet talk about the capture zone that we're maintaining within the red hill shaft where we're pulling any contamination that might be in the aquifer uh towards the pumps so that we can collect them if you go back to in the months following the release you know december all the way through the spring of 22 we recovered several hundred gallons of fuel off of the surface through the skimming operations and everything that was required we've continued to maintain that capture zone and we're to the point now where we're pulling about a teaspoon every 30 days off of the surface so very very little in quantity but we are maintaining and pulling any contamination but we did start and pulling any contamination. But we did start a pilot study, again, working with all the subject matter experts to, we developed a pilot study to try to reduce the pumping to the least amount required to maintain that capture zone. So on the 20th of June, we completed that pilot study. We have resumed up to the pumping rate we were before about 4.3 million gallons a day we're gathering all the data putting it all together and then we're going to be sitting down again with that same group of subject matter experts to verify did we maintain the capture zone effectively and can we permanently reduce our pumping down to that 1.8 million gallon a day average. On a parallel effort to the reducing the captures or reducing the pumpers required to capture zones. We have been proceeding with there's a military construction project, an effort for a water treatment facility that we will be installing at the Red Hill. So that design has been proceeding. The design will be installing at the red hill so that design has been proceeding the design will be complete this fall obviously there is still the congressional approvals required to make sure that that military construction project is fully funded before it is awarded but we are moving very quickly to ensure that we have that water treatment facility ready to go to again knowing that we do not want to forever understands it so the border watch the bike cuts off their pumps so that you're the only draw in that aquifer so all this is coming to you you're getting a teaspoon out a month and then that draw then has to be exit the system so it goes into yava stream after you've taken the teaspoon full out and you're monitoring that there's no more in there that's causing damage to the the the repairing so the within the gap the capture zone within the red hill shaft we are pulling and skimming from the surface of the water. The pump is pulling from 18 foot below the surface of the water to where we are testing the water quality there. We are running it through granular activated carbon treatment to strip out any TPH related components that could exist. And then we are again testing the water at the effluent side of those gap treatment before it is going into the the whole lot of stream so it's being tested prior to as well as the exterior and we're not pulling from the surface we're pulling from 18 and those tests are indicating right those There's no TPH that is being released into the environment at all. Thank you. Any other questions? Go ahead. Yeah, pending any questions, I know that there's a lot of detail. And again, this is why we will always keep this updated on our website. And this is the tool that we're going to utilize any time that I'm briefing, whether it doesn't matter what the form is, this is what we will utilize to make sure that that whole transparency is out there, and we continue to move forward in it. Excuse me, Chair. This is what you caught the I want me to ask a question. Help me with the 8 remaining monitoring wells. So what is your Eta of putting those online? Our goal for all of those 8 remaining is to get them complete by the end of the calendar year. But we have run into substantial issues with some of the the private landowners that are in in the area that are they're not interested in us drilling a well within their area so we continue again border water supply has been very helpful in uh in helping us to to maybe uh encourage or to work through some of the permitting requirements obviously we have to follow all of the section 106 and and following all of the rules but that's what some of our challenges have been so i can't say that we are we are still tracking and pushing hard to complete all 22 by the end of the calendar year but we have some major challenges still to to get through when it comes to some of especially those those land agreements that are required so calendar year is uh fy? Sorry, what was that, sir? Is your calendar year FY24? Or are you looking at December? It would be into the beginning of fiscal year 24, end of calendar year 22. So by December 23 is when we would like to have all 22 in place, but we are a little bit behind schedule due to those land issues right now. So thank you, Captain. And I guess this is for maybe either you or Sarah. You know, you've talked about long-term monitoring. What organization will be in place to carry out the monitoring requirements that you're presently on or is that going to be different? There are quite a few resources right now focused on monitoring. Yes, sir. So as the I'm the commanding officer of NAVFAC Hawaii and NAVFAC Hawaii will maintain the responsibility of proceeding with the long-term monitoring that exists currently as well as any additional follow-on monitoring that may be required. That would all fall within my organization. Has the resources been identified and funded. Don Nottoli, They have the individuals, as well as the resources at least for the next couple of fiscal years are already in place or are being put in place, so the funding right now is not a concern that. Don Nottoli, great thank you very much captain and captain this is don i just have a question about monitoring i know that in response to uh commissioner hannes are you also monitoring um down in any of the stream outflow down by pearl harbor and its impacts to aquatic resources, marine resources? Yes, ma'am. So one of the, following the emergency order, there was a team from the University of Hawaii that does ecological monitoring down in the Halawa stream to ensure that we're not impacting any wildlife or causing any issues. And so that's been ongoing. And we haven't seen any significant issue from that water coming from the GACs. So because it is clean water, it's being tested. We haven't seen any impacts to the lava stream as it's entering Hill Harbor. That's real helpful. So at least we've got some baseline to have some ongoing monitoring to look in the future, whether there's any change. Okay, thank you for confirming that. Any other questions? I know it's almost 1030. General Hashimoto. Oh, go ahead, Aurora. Sorry, I'm keeping people from coffee break um so i just wanted to add i think aaron was working with that effort as i is that correct deputy manual that aaron struck is working with the uh team i will defer to the shop but um kind of uh answering that we've as part of that team we set up kind of a monitoring program with university employee to be the lead on biological monitoring of Palawa Stream and then our staff coordinate and or you know talk to the university employee with that research that's done and we had them present I think it was maybe six months ago on the findings or if there were any significant findings and they they didn't find any um impacts at this time but we can make the request maybe at the next quarterly to maybe do an update more formally on a whole other stream biological monitoring if that's possible um so i do have a question and this is for Captain Sullivan or Ms. Moody. We've talked a lot about monitoring and remediation at specific sites, but I think I'm curious because I think there's a way that the public understands the word remediation and the way that agencies use the term remediation. How do you define and understand remediation? And then who is responsible not for added three or added six, but aquifer cleanup if there is contamination? And maybe that's also between DOH. So I'm not sure who to direct the question to, but maybe we can start here. So part of our efforts is looking at Red Hill holistically right it is not just the situation at three or the situation at six. But because we are actively defueling right now. The goals right now is to pursue side assessment planning, which will be the comprehensive look at the entire facility. All of red hill and identify any historical events that may have occurred at red hill that we're not currently actively pursuing and then we'll begin the process of active remediation or exploration as needed once we don't have fuel in the hill right now that risk is not really worth starting to drill and explore the priorities be fueling and then as we move forward we will look at red hill as a holistic site and identify what site remediation needs to drill and explore the priorities be fueling. And then as we move forward, we will look at Red Hill as a holistic site and identify what site remediation needs to occur. And this is a long-term effort. The Navy is committed to the environmental restoration of Red Hill in the long-term. So we anticipate a complete comprehensive site assessment could take several years. And so that is remedial project management work that will really be occurring with project engineers that are down in the details and looking at aerial view footage of the facility as a whole, pulling up historical data from the archives, identifying anything that could have potentially been located or a certain piece of equipment, or do we need to pull soil from this location or things of that nature. And so right now we have very active efforts at edit 3 because of the events in 2021 and we have we had active specific efforts at added six following the a triple f event um but right now monitoring is is the key goal through defueling just to make sure nothing is changing in the landscape and then we will pursue the active remediation portion of site assessment and that would be for both um land and water right so there's two there's two there's two separate and distinct studies that are going to be done or remediation that's going to be done one for land and one for the aquifer and so how does that that's not on this timeline but at some point it overlaps with the first timeline and yeah it will continue long long after that the bars on this this timeline come and go it will be and it would be an effort between the regulator the regulators in this case would be the department of health and epa um reviewing the plans and getting input from the public um on the remediation okay but as a water person i'm wondering how does the aquifer one work because you know when you're cleaning up soil um it stays in place um not necessarily but right well not necessarily but you know it's a little bit more straightforward you scrape up the dirty soil you know you know it's a little bit more straightforward. You scrape up the dirty soil, you know you move it off site and put it anyways. But how does do you guys have any sense of where that how that aquifer remediation is going to proceed? Or are you waiting for the groundwater monitoring modeling studies? You know, like yeah, I think I mean I think it's a comment we have to. We have to do the modeling to see what what's where it's moving but also um like uh sarah said it really is we we really do need to in earnest wait until it's defueled because um we want to make sure that there there are studies that are being done, but if there is a drop that enters the environment in any way as a result of the defueling effort, we're going to have to analyze that as well. We're very sensitive to any penetrations, any pathways that we could create if there were an event to for them yeah and one of our primary efforts during defueling is groundwater protection efforts so increased monitoring of the aquifer of the soil vapor to be able to quickly identify if anything changes because that's the beauty of having extended periods of data as you can see changes in the data trends and then act quickly accordingly to make sure we're taking the most protective stance possible. I guess I just have a little bit of trouble seeing like we had a contamination event, it moved, it appears to not be as much of a problem anymore, it would be great to see the data that show that if you have the data and if it is visualized. I know we can dig it up and look at it under tables. And then there's a system in place to do a rapid response if something bad happens during defueling. But I guess, to me, it seems more important to have a really tight monitoring system in place because the way model building works is you need data to validate your model. So you have to have your monitoring network and it has to be high frequency and then you can build the model. But the model is only going to tell you something useful in the future if you have a release again, which we hopefully won't if we're defueling. So I'm just trying to piece together so there's the logic so we have doh epa and uh the university of hawaii has a team that is is trying to understand the modeling efforts now, currently. So there are still inputs that need to be placed in to complete the model. And we also have 37 monitoring locations in place right now. So we are actively monitoring those locations in addition to the pursuing new locations. I think, yeah, I think this is great. I think there's a lot of conversations here. Everybody's working really hard. If there is a good opportunity for that information to sort of be packaged into something digestible so that the public can understand, I mean, and I as a member of the public and I have an advanced degree and I really struggle with it, like if we can understand the roles that everybody's playing on this more, not looking at so much at what's happened, but how we're sort of building better responsiveness or awareness of what's in the aquifer. And I believe one of our big efforts has been to improve the environmental side of our website to make it as clear as possible so i'm not sure how familiar you are with the interactive maps that we put in place as well as maps so those discussions are occurring and we're taking the recommendations from kathy ho and her team as well well as Ernie, and trying to incorporate and do just what you said, make it very easily to understand what's going on. It is a complex issue where it's not easy to understand, but that's what the intent of that environmental half of the website is. Okay, that's great. I mean, if I can request, like maybe that if it's ready for like a public facing presentation at the next meeting i think that would be very helpful because yeah like dr make i said we're focused on water um ma'am i also like that add just a little snippet here i know people heard there's a lot of websites out there and you're trying to say okay which website's for what okay that um qr code i showed you in the tank closure graphic yeah okay you go there to that main website you scroll to the bottom all these other websites you heard about are listed right there at the bottom of that main page okay there are safe orders so yes you can go to the qr code and scroll down it's one stop shopping there and you can go down and go to safe orders all these other websites you've heard to this links right there so you don't have to remember six seven different websites yes any other questions comments before general hashimoto do you do you have additional presentation or is this closure presentation uh chair chain that concludes our slides we want to say big mahalo to everyone the commissioners for the opportunity to present this information about what we have been doing what we are doing what we plan on doing and some things we really have to look forward to again the big one going back to jason's initial presentation is the start of the gravity train uh in mid-October for scheduled completion in January, which for historians of this crisis know that that will represent at least a year's worth of condensing of the timeframe for the safe and expeditious defueling of Red Hill, which is about, it's not about the water itself, but it's about the removal of the threat. So really appreciate this opportunity. we'd greatly look forward to our next time showing up here in front of the commission and we've got the things that we'll bring back the next time we're able to get together very good thank you general hashimoto on the team commissioners do you have any final questions before I let the Navy team step down? I'll just say, even in your characterization and your summary, it's not just what you're doing, it's the impact of those actions. It's like you can tell me what plays you ran, but I want to know what the score is. The true art and science of this effort that's the big takeaway yeah this impact whether it's working pretty new thing and i do on behalf of the water commission and at least the public that participates in our process thank you very much dinner hashimono to your team. I think we have felt, at least I felt, this increased level of confidence in this joint task force and the transparency. But you know, every time you let your guard down, all it takes is one. So again, mahalo to your continued commitment and your commitment to us to provide us updates. So I'm going to, we're going to move the Navy off and then we're going to open it up for public comments, but I'm going to take a 10 minute break. We'll come back at 10 45. All right, everyone. Thank you. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Kathy, are we ready to start? you you you you you you Kathy, just pretend I've got the gavel going. um who is this I'll call the meeting back to order. And now thank you again, the Navy for the presentation. I'm not going to take public comments. So we have received written testimony. Is there anybody in the room? I'm going to go first there. Anybody in the room? Okay. The woman in the back, why don't you come up to the table and identify your name? Yep. You'll have three minutes and if you've submitted written testimony know that we've reviewed your written testimony as well thank you okay thank you for allowing me to testify and susan gorman chain um with shutdown red hill uh coalition uh first i want to comment about the navy um you know there's an imbalance of power going on um the navy's presumptions they really are going to have to say that's what i'm hearing um you know when they say we'll let you know after the briefing is written and we'll share with you and you take your comments that is different than working alongside of us and so the the empower the balance of power is not right it is our water uh nothing needs water okay so um first and foremost i wonder if you have all read this uh from the department of health exposure assessment november 2021 release of jet p5 jet fuel into the joint base pearl harbor pick up drinking water system by dr robert buehr as the navy commission read this i'll admit not in its full entirety okay okay great thank you thank you so much um and um i think the report shows that fuel is not the only thing that should be tested um the report and presentation reveal level and the levels and seriousness of exposure that families endured regarding several chemicals in addition to JP5, endure and continue to experience. To me, it is evidence of the US Navy's mishandling and lack of ability, lack of supervision of their contractors, lack of emergency preparedness to deal in any way with the November 2021 jet fuel de-icing agent and solvents and other chemicals that were leaked into the drinking water system and adjusted and handled by kelvis military and civilian households i think the latest evidence and analysis shows without a doubt that the u.s navy cannot be trusted to manage any water system without strong and continual oversight by the commissioners the most recent pfa links is for business management commissioners this happened on your watch and continues to evolve and unfold on your watch commissioners you are not the helpless orchestra that played as the titanic say you have responsibility and power you have access to our lifeboats which in this case is safeguarding our water i'm going to ask you to summarize i'm sorry go ahead okay i'd like you we'd like you to have a meeting every month um it would be nice if the navy was here every month and i have red hill an action item um ask the department of health to update their environmental action levels to protect all water drinkers um do not give the navy any more permission for any more water decrease the navy's water by 20 or whatever the amount of those shafts that they're not going to be reopened and consider pursuing a lawsuit jointly with Board of Water Supply against corporations that created the Forever Chemicals, PFAs, so the creators of the chemicals was paid as remediation to take PFAs out of the water. This has just last month been successfully accomplished to the tune of $1 billion, agreement by Chemours DuPont and Corteva, who agreed to provide more than $1 billion to municipalities and water to ask you to. This has been four minutes, but we've also received your written testimony. So thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much. The next the gentleman, why don't you come on up and identify yourself, please. please hello i'm matt guyer for the public within model and i'd like to appreciate the commission for having this public meeting for allowing public testimony and for your your time and consideration of this matter and looking into it uh at one part of the meeting i i heard a concern um whether uh this is relevant and we were on the slide that was talking about the repurposing of red hill and whether that's relevant for this commission and i just want to ask don't you think that given the tanks are located in or on right above the aquifer depending on who you ask that any repurposing of these tanks would have a relevant impact on our water, potentially permanent impact on our water. So I hope you consider that. The other thing I noticed from the presentation was that I didn't see anything about ag land and it's been known that these PFAS, a lot of these chemicals that are being polluted into the water can be taken into fish, taken into plants, move up the food chain, enter into our bodies. I was recently, someone recently reached out to me who lives on ag land in Aiea, and they said the military came, asked to make sure that no one was drinking any of the water that's being pumped into their homes and then left without doing anything and then the landlord in that property has tested the water but won't release the results to the residents and their young children are bathing in this water sometimes drinking it even though they're being told not to but they're little kids so they do what they like uh and it's it's just something that i think we should look also at the ag land because that's very important and i i know you're the commissioner of water resource management but if not you who if not when oh if not now i need to i need to respond what you're saying you're obviously referring to my comments when you said that i somebody said it was irrelevant wrong okay i apologize i did not say that what i said was that we were starting to range too far away from the water issue so don't don't go mischaracterizing my comments please other than other than that other than that i'm fine with what you said okay thank you thank you could you wrap up could you summarize your testimony i'll stop there that's fine thank you very much for your testimony um is there anybody else in the room that would like to provide a public comment okay i'm I'm gonna go on the YouTube. I have Susan, go ahead. Good morning, can you hear me? Yes. Okay, my written testimony contains a slide show for you since that's one of your favorite ways of getting information. In the slideshow, I'm referring to several references. When the Navy provides a supplement, the DOH and the EPA need to respond to it. So some of these slides show the Navy's response to the DOH comments of 15 March closure plan, the Navy response to EPA comments of 7 April, some information from the closure supplement too, which they received after they already provided the comments and then because i transcribed the f-jack excerpts from the f-jack i don't plan on going through all of these slides because i believe they're self-explanatory so i provided talking I would ask the chair if you can find out if the public can get a link to the QR code, because I don't even know how to use a QR code. So that would be helpful for me and maybe for other people the other statement i'd like to make is anything under 266 parts per billion will be designated as non-detect i do not support any reuse of this facility i know the legislatures are looking legislators are looking at some kind of revenue. They need to realize that it's going to take three years to get these pipelines out. So we have plenty of time to start planning and talking. If there is money received. Susan Nemitzki, This money needs to put in some kind of trust for the people that have drank and are seriously ill from the contamination. Thank you Susan for giving a brief update on Dr. Brewer's memo and I can provide the video and my transcripts of that to the Commission. Susan Nemitzki, one part of the navy's susan can you summarize your testimony your comments yes there's two points i want to make the navy believes reuse is outside the UST closure requirements and are not aware of other closed USTs that have been reused for non-fuel purposes. These are these are taken directly from my references and the last one is during the FCHAC the DOH presented, reduce, recycle and reuse, neither the HRS 382.G nor the underground, there's nothing saying that these tanks or that place has to be reduced, recycled and reused. I just don't want this kind of information going out unless somebody can point me to exactly a document that says USTs must be reused. Mahalo. Thank you very much, Susan. I've got next is, is it Abby Seitz? You can unmute yourself. Are you here to testify on item B1? Thank you very much, Susan. I've got next is that Abby sites. You can unmute yourself. Are you here to testify on item B. One. Sure. I think she's here for B. 3. Okay. Okay. Is there anybody else is that is it France? Again, B3 chair. Sorry. Okay. No, very good. Is there anybody else that i'm missing um kathy online no okay that i'm going to close public comments this was really just for informational there's no action to be taken sure i have a question of uh susan gorman chang for Redhill, if you could return. You heard the discussion of the name. You heard what they did report on. You heard our questions and what we sought. What did we miss? What do you think are some important things that were not raised that we ought to be looking at? Thank you. Number one, I think Susan Picardis brought this up too when they say non-detect they need to give us the exact parts per trillion or whatever that is not just not detect a cheese spoonful characterization or whatever you'd like more specific data okay um the second thing is i'd like to know if the department of health is going to revise their health advisory system based on the information in this. There's a lot more chemicals that people were exposed to and taking those all at once is different than just looking for jet fuel. The health implications are really- A larger suite of chemical analysis. Right, right. Based on this Department of Health report. Are you going to re-provise your medical advisory that said do not just test project you in people's blood you know i i we will look at that but i um i have to talk to our toxicologists so we'll look at that okay it would be yeah okay um let me see yeah another thing so we're all talking about reusing red hill and we're all staring at this you know chart that says 54 of the people don't want it repurposed and yet there's this assumption that we will repurpose it. And this discussion keeps going on almost deaf to the fact that most people don't want it repurposed. Why are we proceeding with trying to repurpose it again? Like Susan said, revise, repurpose, recycle, whatever. I don't think that's a valid reason. Can I respond? So it is a a in all things you know in a lot of things when we're dealing with solid waste those are the three r's reduce reuse and recycle and so we it's not a requirement it in this context so you're choosing to do it no this context. It's not a requirement. It is. Would you please look at this and determine whether one you can reuse it? For example, some people have said, why don't we get the University of Hawaii to do a research center there? Or why don't you make it into a museum? Those are reuses of that facility. It is, it may not be, but that's what people are, some people are saying. So it's not that we're gonna, that it's gonna happen. It's just, will you take a look at these three criteria and see if you could reuse it and recycle it meaning could be taking out the pipelines and the pipes or the electrical system and reuse it in some other way it's just these are three three words that we want that we want the navy and the public to think about is there a way that you can reuse or reduce or recycle this facility to make it a better facility or to make it into something different? It's not a requirement. It is a goal of ours. Okay, so there's still the option of just closing and not absolutely absolutely good money after that no absolutely i i thought we we covered that my question was what did we miss we had a we had a good discussion of that because we said we want some criteria we want to see what the now the options are we want a thorough analysis of each option again as long as and we we see what the public thinks that data is clear. Bring us back to the agenda. I mean, Neil, is that what you wanted? Is that what you asked? Okay. All right. So hearing no other public testimony, no other. other any other questions from the commission okay i am going to close either be one yes um so this is addressing susan again because of the first item you brought up and maybe um uh commissioner whole um my understanding is that um dr brewer's findings once released sort of sit in the lap of what doh takes care of what role or what important insights do we as commissioners make when we're often tasked with water quantity issues. How do we use this information to guide our efforts? Is it relevant? Because it seems like important information. I was reading it last. So this assessment was really done to help CDC in its efforts. So that was the sole purpose for the drafting of this document. CDC will take this document and do what it needs to do to analyze and come up with its own funding. Okay. Okay. And then there's this this public understanding and I'm just trying to understand where some of the tension or frustration may lie and I feel like as Department of Health you're supposed to be looking for our health. And so to say that you're just going to give it to the CDC, and not like revise your medical advisory so we are we're we're constantly looking and as you know if you know roger brewer we're constantly looking and revising our eals and all kinds of things so it is it is something that we are constantly looking at i can't commit to you today that we are going to change our advisory because that's not i'm not the sme but i can say that we will i will bring it back to my team to look at and make a determination and i think it would be a disservice if you didn't in my opinion revise that medical advisory based on the information now that you have and it's not just about jet fuel it's the solvents it's the um deicers it's all of those things in there and the impact it has on people when they're they're exposed to it all together if i may can i intervene switch into my ua chat yeah um i think uh reviewing, the complexity of the biology of the situation requires a different expertise. And I do think that is CDC, but I think there's need for specialists and experts that may not be employed by DOH. So I think it's a really important landmark to convene more conversations around and what about how to look for the effects of the de-icers, for instance, that do have neurological impacts that are showing up in people and increasing, for instance. So I know this from my UH side. So making sense of all these different lines of evidence, it's really hard to do in a regulatory space. You know, a lot of us may not be specific specialists. So I think there's important conversations that need to be had and, you know, you're bringing it up here, but maybe they do need to be organized and worked out. It's been a while since I reviewed, since I've read the um the medical advisory but i do believe that the medical advisory didn't prohibit anybody any uh anyone from seeking medical attention and it didn't prohibit any any of the doctors from doing the appropriate things that they thought it was necessary that's a conversation for another time and i guess our other frustration is excuse me can can i just call order to this i want to stay in our lane i mean i think these are great conversations doh has its own platform um i would like to bring us back i mean we we're still on the first agenda item. And there are several other presentations. So, you know, I understand the frustration, the tension. I think the intention of these public platforms was to create, provide a space for the Navy to provide us good information. Clearly, there are other platforms available for specific subject matters. And this one, Kathy, is probably more in your wheelhouse when you have other public meetings regarding DOH. So can I bring us back to Water Commission? Okay? Okay. So I think that was the last testimony on the Navy's item. May I add something? Pardon? Can Kathy Ho please let the public know when their next public forum will be because Susan and I would love to join you. Thank you. Okay, thank you very much. I'm sure Kathy checked her website. She can make that available, but yes. So I'm now going to go on to item b2 it's a briefing by the U.S. Geological Survey professional paper 1876 volcanic aquifers of Hawaii contributions to assessing groundwater availability on Kauai, oahu maui presented by scott izuka phd usgs thank you neil hi chair um chair and members and welcome to me in quebec so i'm just going to introduce scott izuka and then um to his presentation and you probably you guys probably all know scott isuka and then um to his presentation and you probably you guys probably all know scott but scott izuka has been a hydrologist with the usgs pacific islands water science center since 1989 and has conducted water resources studies in hawaii american samoa and micronesia most of his work is in island groundwater and surface water hydrology but he also has published research in geomorphology climate sedimentology stratigraphy geochemistry geochronology videontology and paleogeography so that's currently the project lead for the hawaiian mechanic after study one of several regional groundwater availability assessments being conducted by the usgs water availability and use science program scott received a bs in geology and geophysics from the university of hawaii he received his ms in geology from the university of kansas and a phd in geology and geophysics from UH at Manoa. So Steph, thanks for the presentation. Take it away. Thanks, Neil. I'm going to share my screen quickly here. And share. Okay. Okay, everybody see that my screen? My slides? White screen. White screen. Yeah, not just Scott. Not yet. Can you see it? Nope. White screen. Oh my gosh. Okay. Let me see if I got the right one going here. Try this again. Share screen. I'll try entire screen. How's that? Oh, can you see a screen? Okay, great. That's that's that's progress. Okay. There we go. There we go. Yeah. Okay, here we go. Okay, let me hide this guy. Okay, well, thank you, Neal, and thank you for inviting me to speak about this study that we've been doing. So I'm going to talk today about the Hawaii Volcanic Aquifer Study and give you some of some highlights of the results. This was a study, one of the studies that the USGS was doing across the nation of the groundwater availability of the principal aquifers in the United States. The final report, the third and final report of this study was recently published, I think maybe about three or four months ago. And most of what I'm going to talk about comes from this final report. But there are two other reports. The first report is a summary of the hydrogeology of Hawaii. And it includes updates all the way up to when it was published was kind of like the mid 2010s or so. It also includes updates on groundwater recharge for Kauai, Oahu, and Maui. The second report, let's see, let me get my pointer out here, oops. Oops. Well, the second report, that one goes down into the weeds about groundwater modeling. So for those who are interested in that, you can look at that, you know, if you're into mod flow and all the details that went into that. But most of the information that I'm gonna be talking about again is in the final report. And there's also a fact sheet that's available. All of these are available online at these sites, or if you just Google UHGS publications warehouse and volcanic aquifers of Hawaii, you'll get it. Okay, so how to answer the question of how much groundwater is available from Hawaii's aquifers? Well, all groundwater withdraws have consequences. In Hawaii, I'm sure many of you are familiar with this, but those consequences are water table decline, saltwater rise and encroachment, I guess you should see it down here, and reduction of groundwater discharge to springs, streams, wetlands, and the ocean. Groundwater availability depends on the severity of the consequences a community is willing to accept. So groundwater availability depends on what you're willing to accept and consequences. And we know that those consequences, you know, it's a complicated question and involves human and environmental health considerations, economics, legal rights and statutes and so forth, which are kind of beyond the science part. The consequences also differ by hydrogeologic setting. In the report, we grouped the groundwater occurrences in Hawaii into four principal hydrogeologic setting. Now in the report, we grouped the groundwater occurrences in Hawaii into four principal hydrogeologic settings. Again, these are probably very familiar to you, but there's a freshwater or basal lens setting, there's dike-impounded groundwater, there's thickly saturated aquifers, and then there's perch aquifers. I'll talk about these, I'll talk about the first three anyway, subsequently, but there's also enigmatic occurrences and this includes things like the Schofield aquifer, or Schofield high level groundwater, and some of the things that are being discovered in, on the big island that don't really fit into these principal hydrogeologic settings. We'll talk about that a little bit. Okay, so the freshwater or basal lens, again, very familiar to you. Freshwater floating buoyantly on saltwater in the aquifer. When you take groundwater from that, the consequences of taking groundwater from that is water table reduction and saltwater rise and reduction of discharge to the ocean. Where there is cap rock, then the freshwater lens is thicker because the cap rock resists the flow of water to the ocean. The freshwater lens gets thicker, but it also causes some of the groundwater discharge to discharge above sea level to springs, such as Pearl Harbor Springs, a good example. And so when you take water from this system, again, you have water table decline and rise of saltwater and encroachment of saltwater, but you also have reduction of discharge to streams that are on land um in the dyke impounded groundwater system we have low permeability dikes volcanic dikes that have um impounded groundwater hundreds of feet above sea level and where the erosion has exposed the dikes then water discharges from these dead compartments and feed streams and support stream base flow when you take water from this system then again you have water table decline and reduction of groundwater discharge to streams and and springs and things on the on the land there's also reduction of groundwater recharge the ocean there is some salt water uh encroachment near the coast but for the most part this area is not going to be affected by salt water intrusion okay and then there's a stickyly saturated aquifers. These are aquifers that are not highly permeable, that the entire aquifer is made out of low permeability rock. And in particular, the example that I've worked on is the one on Kauai in the Lihue Basin where lava flows, thick lava flows have filled in pre-existing depressions and formed these thick, low permeability aquifers. And in this case, the fresh water saturates all the way to the land surface and much of the, excuse me, much of the groundwater discharge occurs at streams above sea level. So of course, if you take water from that, one of the biggest impacts is going to be to would be reduction of stream flow. There is also reduction of groundwater discharge at the ocean. There likely is salt water encroachment near the coast, but you know this freshwater lens is pretty thick so how far this might threaten wells further inland we don't really know. Okay so the one enigmatic occurrence that I'm going to talk about today is the Schofield high level groundwater. It's an area of high level groundwater that's higher than you would expect from in in high permeability aquifer um we know from data groundwater data that it's not perched it's saturated all the way down to sea level and fresh water probably extends quite a bit below sea level um many hydrologists have postulated some sort of a groundwater barrier like a dam vertical structure that is supporting this but the actual structure is not really known. Now the probably the main consequence of taking water out of this is reduction of groundwater flow to adjacent aquifers. So yeah it will reduce the amount of water available in the adjacent aquifers. So yeah, it will reduce the amount of water available in the adjacent aquifers. Okay, so to quantify the consequences of groundwater withdrawal for this study, we use groundwater models of Kauai, O'ahu, and Maui. These islands have most of the, well these islands have all of the principal hydrologic settings that we talked about before so at least we can test them. We created calibrated models which had 2001 to 2010 conditions for pumping and recharge and land use and so forth. So then we took this model, this calibrated model, and then we did some scenarios looking backwards to see what would happen and when we compare these backward scenario backward looking scenarios to the calibrated model we can see how conditions that exist in 2001 to 2010 have impacted the groundwater resource then we also looked in the future and did some hypothetical scenarios with increased withdrawal and change in rainfall to see how these conditions might affect our groundwater resources relative to the calibrated 2001 to 2010 conditions. So for the first one, let's look backwards. In this example, we're looking at in the past, one of the scenarios that we did was we just shut down all the wells that we had in the 2001, 2010 simulation. So this would be looking back, you know, to pretty much pre-development conditions. For example, and this is the results of that simulation, this is just Oahu, for example, and these colors show the change in groundwater levels, the intensity of change in groundwater levels. And you can see that by shutting down all the wells, it caused water levels to, I'm sorry, I got to go back, I'll rephrase that. Looking at the no withdrawal scenario and calibrated model, we can see how the 2001 to 2010 conditions impacted the past. So then we can see that the 2001 to 2010 conditions have caused groundwater levels, water levels to decrease quite a bit in the dike impounded groundwater areas. A little bit more here because, but not as much in the Waianae area because withdrawals are not as much as they are in the Ko'olau side. The freshwater lands, despite having quite a bit of withdrawal in 2001 to 2010, we could see that the water table hasn't declined quite as much as it has in the Deccan Pounded area, but that's because of the high permeability of the freshwater lens setting. But in the freshwater lens setting, the saltwater-freshwater boundary rose considerably under this 2001 to 2010 condition. So it shows that for the freshwater lenses, saltwater rise is one of going to be one of the principal factors that limit groundwater availability. You know, there is a little bit also going on in the dicomp impounded areas but not as much as you see in the freshwater lens. This map shows the effect of the withdrawals on stream flow and now again we see that most of the impact is happening in the streams in the dike-impounded groundwater areas. In the freshwater lands areas, there is an impact right at where the cap rock meets the aquifer. And there is a groundwater discharge to springs in the freshwater lands. This is the Pearl Harbor Springs. Another simulation was to look at the combination of withdrawals and recharge. So we looked at, we simulated recharge in 1870. This was before the first modern well was drilled. And then we combined it with the no withdrawal scenario and then by comparing that to the calibrated model we could see what the impact of current recharge changes and pumping have. And most of the changes in recharge have resulted between these two periods have resulted in land use have resulted from land use changes, including agriculture. And so I'm going to show Kawai for this example, and this is for water changes in water levels. And the agriculture has caused some areas to, for water levels in some areas to increase and that's shown by these blue patches. And in some areas, it is decreases shown in the brown areas. So the blue areas in particular for Kauai, they correspond with irrigation reservoirs that are leaking, and they enhance the groundwater recharge so they're going to reduce the effect of groundwater withdrawals in these areas in areas where there's a reduction in recharge and lowering of water levels that's going to exacerbate the effects of groundwater withdrawals. Another simulation was to look at to the future and this is to increase withdrawals in the future. And for this we increase the withdrawals from conventional wells. So these are the conventional vertical wells, wells that are drilled vertically, not tunnels. We did not increase the, simulate any increases in tunnel withdrawal. But so just for the conventional wells, and this is a map of how the increases look, the bigger the dot, the bigger the increase. These increases are based on the permitted rates at the Water Commission. In most cases, the permitted rates are actually higher than the actual groundwater withdrawal rates. And here's a map showing the water level changes caused by that scenario. And we can see that the big impact was in the Schofield Aquifer and that, if I go back here, you can see that's because there's a bunch of increases here. Oops. But there is also changes along the central corridor where the groundwater levels were, groundwater withdrawals were increased. There's some increases in the decompounding groundwater areas. These are high intensity. You can see the color here is kind of dark. So that indicates a high intensity water level change, but it's not widespread. And this is a map of the change in the saltwater freshwater boundary. And you can see that again, the big change is in the freshwater lens areas, both in the south and in the north. This is a map of the change in stream flow, and the biggest change that's apparent here is at the springs by the Cap Rock, so the Pearl Harbor Springs and North Shore too. You don't see so much in the deck-impounded groundwater area but that's probably because the model did not change the withdrawal in the tunnels and much of the water that's developed in this area is from these tunnels. Okay, one thing we could say about the Schofield Aquifer is that this change in future withdrawals has, the model simulation does indicate that the groundwater flow from the Schofield Aquifer to adjacent freshwater lenses in the north and in the south is going to be reduced. It also pulls more water, causes more water to flow in from the dicompounded groundwater areas. Okay, now looking at one more thing, and this is another future assessment. This was a change in rainfall. This was a climate change assessment. And for this we used a statistical downscaling of RCP 8.5 for the mid-century. I think you all are familiar with that, but it's a pretty dry scenario. And this indicates that our model simulations indicate for the water levels that there can be some areas that will have large water level impacts and in this case it's Waianae, the dry side of O'ahu. It also has, you can see some color in the impounded areas of the Ko'olau and in the Schofield High-Level Aquifer. This map shows the change in saltwater-freshwater boundary caused by the reduction in rainfall. And we can see that accompanying the change in water levels that we saw on the previous map is saltwater encroachment in the Wai'anae area. So, to summarize, the primary consequences limiting availability of groundwater, difference amongst the hydrogeologic settings. So in the freshwater land setting, saltwater rise and encroachment, reduction of groundwater discharge to the ocean, and also to springs where there's cat rock, those are the principal consequences that are gonna limit groundwater availability in those areas. For dike-impounded and thickly saturated aquifers, the principal consequences limiting availability include water level decline reduction of discharge to streams and springs for upgrading aquifers such as a Schofield aquifer Schofield high level groundwater it would be reduction of flow to adjacent aquifers now these consequences do depend on the magnitude of the withdrawals and of course they can change with changes in recharge caused by land use or climate. So I think collaboration between management and science can work towards a balance between groundwater withdrawal and the need to limit the consequences. What we showed in this in this study was a demonstration of how groundwater modeling can help quantify the consequences of groundwater withdrawal for a certain set of situations but if water managers have a certain set of limits that they don't, for the consequences that they don't want to overstep, then science can run scenarios to figure out what the available groundwater is under those limitations. if stakeholders have estimates of how much water they would like to have. Models could be run to quantify what the consequences of taking that water would be. And that is all I have. Thank you. Thank you very much, Scott. Commissioners questions for scott izuka i'll be that person aurora your hand is up thank you for the presentation um it's good to see it a second time um i was wondering um ryan imata presented information on the deep monitoring walls last meeting and the magnitude i guess of the changes of the transition zone seemed pretty complex for i think it was pearl harbor aquifer ryan are you there and and and then looking at your i think it was 2000 to 2010 model for Oahu. It looked like that. I think it was a saltwater freshwater boundary picture, the blue. Yeah, you want to share? Should I share my screen? Can you share that? Sorry, then I won't be able to see everybody. But oh, well. It looked like you had some really large changes on the order of feed and I was just wondering if you kids. It's a model and Ryan's is data and have there been kind of efforts to take change. Well, the model was calibrated to the 2001 to 2010 conditions. And I admit that's a decade, more than a decade old already. Yeah. I think it was the Oahu saltwater freshwater boundary second, first first, this one, yeah, effect of the 2010 withdrawal on. So this is relative to, yeah, shutting them all off. Oh, to shutting them. Yeah, yeah. Okay. Okay. So So the way we did it is we took the calibrated model, which had all of those wells operating, right, pumping. And then to see what would happen if they did not exist, we shut them all down and then we did the comparison. So this is the result of having those wells pumping. Okay. Okay, yeah. So this is a kind of a imagined scenario if we, if we stop pumping, is that right? And the reality was that the wells went in, you know, over time, right? They didn't just happen. Okay. Okay. So when Ryan said the transition zone has been stable from, you know, over the last, I don't know, 20 years or so, or a period of record, they aren't really comparable to this image, I guess. That's all I'm saying. I'm just trying to clear my thinking was like, that data was used to build the model, but that data and this image do not line up and I shouldn't compare them, right? Well, there are things that are going to make the model, you know, it's a model, but it's going to make it difficult. Well, there are going to be challenges for matching actual data, but that doesn't mean it's, you know, that you should throw out one or the other. But one of the things is that this is a steady state model. So there is, this is what will happen ultimately if the 2001 to 2010 conditions were kept steady forever. There's no time dimension on this simulation. So I couldn't say that this would happen in 100 years or 10 years or 20 years or something like that. And yeah, and the other thing is that, that also means that the wells didn't go in, in the way that they actually did over time. Oh, the other thing that I wanted to say is, so the change in the freshwater-saltwater interface is going to increase, it's going to, the change is going to happen quickly at the beginning and slow down as you approach the, you know, the steady state. It may be very difficult to see changes as the, as these freshwater, as this, as a system settles into a new steady state and the third thing is that most likely the aquifer is not at steady state because new wells are being put in all the time right okay, your hand is up, go ahead. Yeah, how is this affect current estimates of sustainable year yield and what's the timeframe in which we'd have to change that? Well, I guess my take on the sustainable yield issue is that for the things that, the consequences that limit the availability of water from any particular aquifer is going to be different, depend on its hydrogeologic system so in this case let me get the pointer out so that so again in the freshwater lenses things like water table and or the saltwater freshwater interface or the depthwater freshwater interface, or the depth to the transition zone will be very important. But when you look at things like that compounded groundwater and in O'naahu or Kauai or the thickly saturated aquifers is probably going to be stream flow. Because at some point, you know, as the managers of Hawaii's groundwater, someone will probably ask you, well, can you limit the amount of streamflow reduction in, you know, in my area? And that's going to become the limiting factor. It's not going to be saltwater rise anymore so then you'll have to assess the availability of groundwater for that compounded areas based on that criterion. So that also already changes, I think. That's not really my question. My question is that I see that sometime in the future, even though there's resistance to it, is that you're going to have to move water around, like, for example, on the island of Oahu. You can't go by aquifer-specific use like now. For example, I know there's resistance on the windward side to be able to transfer water to the leeward side if this got getting short um so i'm i'm more interested in not aquifer specific water but how that would affect the availability of water across the whole island and in the in the practical consequence of the of your research is that that not gonna make any difference or do we have to worry about that in the future? I think the, okay, I think the approach to assessing groundwater availability has to take into account these consequences. I guess, I'm not understanding the question because i thought that's what you were asking well let me simplify my question how is your research going to impact what we consider available sustainable yield is it not going to have any consequence? Or if not, what is the purpose of your research? Oh, okay. So what I've shown, the research has shown that the, as managers, you're trying to determine the amount of water available for human use. But there are also other uses that you are trying to balance them with, right? So in order to get to that answer, you have to consider things that are appropriate for those situations. So for those settings, whether that canounded groundwater or a freshwater lens, it's going to be a different set of limiting circumstances. So the study that I've done, the study that we've done, it's a group of people, demonstrated that we can use things like groundwater modeling. We can also have other kinds of studies that can assess, that can quantify the impacts of groundwater withdrawal. And that will then in turn help you determine what the groundwater availability is. So it's a question, it's kind of a question, a chicken and egg question, to know how much groundwater is available. We first, the scientists need to know first, how much change are you willing to accept? How much of a consequence are you willing to accept? I guess I'm not getting through to you. What I wanna know is that, based on what you've been presenting, are we going to have to change the sustainable yield of the aquifers, like for example, on Oahu? I think you will have to change the method. And my secondary question on that was, what was the timeframe of that change? As, okay okay that is i guess that would be a groundwater management problem yeah you know because for example if we have the pearl arbor aquifer at x amount of million gallons as we take it down if we take it down further down i i assume that you're going to already have to change the sustainable yield as you get closer to the maximum, because you're having saltwater uprisal, etc. Or decreased stream flow or no more watercress farming in Pearl City. So that was my question, is that what would you estimate the timeframe in which we start to have to consider reducing the sustainable yields? Okay, that is, again, the model is not capable of, it's a steady state model, so it doesn't have a time element in it. So it won't tell you how much longer you have. Models can be done, can be created to do that, but these models were not and takes a lot more data than we had. But if one of your scenarios was increased withdrawals. Right. So it seems to me that if that's one of your models and you could come up with an estimate, that would be a direct relationship to how much of a sustainable yield has to change, correct? Yeah, well, it would tell you what the result, it would tell you what the result of changing the pumping rate is, but it doesn't tell you whether it's sustainable because it depends on how much the water managers and I'm thinking that's you that's the water commission, how much of the a consequence of doing that you are willing to accept, because we saw that by doing those with just by doing those scenarios we saw that it caused the freshwater lens to get thinner it caused some streams to go um to have less stream discharge some springs to have lower discharge so is that an acceptable without the without the answer to what's acceptable, it's virtually impossible for the scientist to tell you how much is available. So you're saying then that we decide sustainable yield when we start seeing negative effects? Because when I was on the Water Commission, we had sort of crude models for figuring out what sustainable years was it at mink and i can't remember yeah so are we still dependent if we're if we're still dependent on that and the only way that we would change the sustainable yield is if we start seeing we're topping off and we're going to start seeing negative effects like we did on the eo aquifer in maui a couple of decades ago um so oh okay uh no no question maybe if i can try to chime in a little bit to um commissioner i think you know this is one data set that we use as staff to come up with recommendations on any adjustments to sustainable yield and the time frame for that. There is another study that's being hopefully going to get published by the end of this year, which is the impact of climate change on recharge. So there's the recharge values, there's the hydrogeology and evaluation these different um hydro hydrogeology conditions and scenarios that we have to consider and as you mentioned the sustainable yield and the ram model is is crude right it has a lot of assumptions built into it and so part of our challenge i think working with ryan his groundwater team working with aaron and dean with surface water is to look at this more comprehensively um maybe just for clarification scott you know in your maximum um pump scenarios which looks at future increases is that based on pump capacity or was that based on water use permit allocations because we're in a water management yeah it was on um permit was on permit allocations. Permit allocations, okay. Yeah, yeah. So it's getting to your, towards management on Oahu because we're a groundwater management area, except for Waianae currently. You know, another management tool is the ability to shift allocations, reduce allocations, where we may see potential impacts based on these additional studies or that that could be a recommendation that we as staff look at based on this new data right so we had set a sustainable yield we allocated based on that sustainable yield but with this additional data and information we may need to revisit those allocations if those impacts to springs stop shorelines discharge or other types of protected public trust uses are impacted we might need to reevaluate that so that's my initial reason so we wouldn't so much change the sustainable yield uh but rather we would change allocations there there could be both it could be multi-pronged um i i think a lot of the data that and partnerships we've had with usgs on a lot of this research and you know uh is jumping on board with water resource research centers work um we can come at it both ways i think the commission has adopted historically a very conservative approach to sustainable yield and always pick the bottom of these ranges um the commission could open that box up and look at where there's a high demand and there's this range. And if we're not seeing impact, do we want to create a range of sustainable yield and adjust it that way? Again, it is a management tool that I think can be revisited and looked at. In a way, region or hydrologic unit by hydrologic unit, it could be Moku by Moku, it could be by island by island, like you're suggesting, if we needed to shift water resources around Oahu, we're having a presentation by Water Supply right after this on East Honolulu Watershed Management Plan. So I'm curious to see how that maybe builds off of some of these conversations about how water is utilized on this island. Considering the built physical environment of this, you know, the board's infrastructure. I think it should be both strategies. But that's something that we have to bring up and recommend to you folks as our policy setters. What do you want to see pursued moving forward? Any other questions? I have one, Scott. On your summary, you talked about major changes and you included climate change. What, in your mind, what is that? Is that the sea level rise and greater salinity? What were you thinking of? Because with the accelerated climate change, does this modeling get impacted by that? The thing that we looked at in the model as far as climate change was the change in precipitation oh okay oh yeah not sea level rise but that is another consideration i think there are other people researching that okay all right thank you aurora um thanks for this i just um was wondering is there a way that we can dynamically explore scenarios for planning or is that does it have to be run do we have this the commission staff need to give you the parameters do you have to run it and give it back or or will there be a future way where we can say play you know play planner play god a little bit and say if this happens what happens in the ko'olau if we change this dial you know what what happens to to these different um response variables you know that is a really good question because that is something that um the usgs and um you know else throughout the U.S.GS nationwide has kind of thought about because for us you know as you say if you if the water commission came up with this scenario and you wanted us to test it then we'd run the model and then we write a report and then you know so many years later however however you get them. Yeah, and we understand that. So one of the things that has been explored, excuse me, and unfortunately, I don't know what the current status of it is, but it was somehow getting the ability of the users that includes the public to run certain things on groundwater models. Because that's really what I think the value of the groundwater model would be. So you could say, okay, I'm going to put wells in here and here and here, put it on and they've i think they've explored things like uh web-based um uh you know a web-based tool that does that and then because groundwater models take a while to run and but that's going to change because things are going to get faster and faster faster but anyway because groundwater models take a while to run back then when they were trying these things, they would have the, my understanding is that they would have the results ready for you at a certain time and then they would send you a text and say okay here's your results, so you know, maybe might take a couple days for the groundwater model to run that scenario. But anyway, scenario testing should, I think, I would just looking into the future that's probably might not happen in my career but I would think that that would be something that could be done they've already explored doing it I'm sorry did that answer your question what's discouraging to hear that it might not be during your career and maybe there's ways to make that happen sooner, unless you're planning to retire soon. Maybe that was a hint. But anyway, yeah. It's possible for that to happen. I think the technology is already there. There needs to be a customer for it. And I think, you know, there is. And then someone to provide that product. And I think the USGS could do that. Thank you. Okay. Any other questions? Is there anybody in the room that wants to make a comment on this? Anybody in zoom happy there anybody abby and France are here for is it b b3 b3 okay thank you i don't see any questions scott i think you've answered whatever we have thank you so much for the presentation okay thank you thank you you know i notice it's 12 o'clock do you want to now take a lunch break before we move into item b3 B three. It's a future. I don't know how long item B three is fine to take. But let me France there. Yeah, let me let me admit B three item. I don't have the same, you guys know how long your presentation will take. I'm actually a observer on the on the plan so but we do have meetings this afternoon, so. Okay, let's just go ahead then. Go ahead, we'll do your presentation and then we'll take a lunch break after that. Go ahead. Thank you so much. Great, so thank you commission for inviting us to speak today. I am I have two different devices, so I'm going to share screen from. Go ahead. Can I answer the ones break after that? Go ahead. Mary or Abby, your YouTube is on. You got to be. Sorry, it's fine. Thank you. Sorry. Oh, great. um youtube is on you gotta be sorry it's fine thank you sorry great so thank you commission for sorry about that um yeah we're planning about a half an hour uh presentation that depends on how the question and answer would go um so up to you if you want to take a lunch break. We're happy to come in after it's up to you. Oh, you're on mute. Chair, you're unmuted, you're on mute. Yeah, no, I saw Neil nodding his head. Let's go forward and then we'll let you guys conclude. Go through your go forward and then we'll let you guys conclude. Go through your presentation. And then after that, we'll take lunch and do our action item. So go ahead, Barry and Abby. Great. And just as one request, I am doing this from two different devices and I'm still in the waiting room for my, oh, it looks like I'm being connected now. Great. Thank you so much. I will share my screen from this device. Thank you. the Pono Lulu Watershed Management Plan as part of the overall O'ahu Water Management Plan, the County Water Use and Development Plan. So I'm Barry Usagawa, head of the Water Resources Division at the Pono Lulu Board of Watershed Plan with Abbey Sites from Planning for Community. Next. Okay, next. So we're gonna, this is our agenda. i wanted to talk about the plan status the framework that goes on objectives and then i wanted to just expand on the chapter access chapter one wall water management plan overview which is the island water use and development plan and then abby is going to then um jump into the regional watershed plan which is east Honolulu talk about the planning process and schedule the watershed profile chapter two and the current and future water demands in east Honolulu uh the the specific objectives um basic policies, projects and strategies and how we plan to implement it. And then we're just about ready for the public review draft. We just went through an agency review draft with the commission staff and the department of planning and permitting. And then end with the approval process is how we or how we think we are going to get plan approved through city council and the commission and then Q&A at the end. Next. So the status, I'm sorry. So the status of the plans, and as you may know that we're, instead of one Island plan, we're doing eight. We've, because it allows us to take a deeper dive into each region and come up with place-based strategies and projects and align better with the city land use plans. But we've so far got Waianae, North Shore, Kolauloa and Kolaupoko watershed management plans approved by the commission and accepted into ordinance chapter 30. We still have South O'ahu still pending. And that's, and I apologize for the delay, but we're trying to address climate change. And so this, the East Honolulu is our first chance to actually tell you about what we've done to try to build that into some scenario planning. Next. So familiar with this, but I just wanted to dive a little bit deeper into this, of course, the state water code, the general plan and the legal regulatory framework. A little bit on the Hawaii water plan, you're familiar with the four components of the county water use and development plan has to account for and include the state findings of the other state plans um you know just the name of the county water use and development plan per se is is somewhat limiting um although it's broader um but in the title it's basically a plan for water use and development basically how much where's the water how much do you need, and how are you gonna get it there? But it should incorporate management of water and conservation and protection and restoration. And so the council back in 1990 renamed it or named it the O'ahu Water Management Plan, and this is the framework. A little bit of the statewide framework of 2000 there is a section 3-26 that allows for flexibility for innovation to accommodate unique and county-specific concerns tailored to each county and so that's why we broke it up into eight regional plans the in july of 2022 there was a presentation on some of the updates that could be made to the statewide framework those gaps were climate uncertainty applying indigenous knowledge ag water plan utility and integrating land use and and water policies and agencies into the planet um by by breaking it into these regional watershed management plans we we feel that we've addressed a large part of that. And so you may know that what was broken up in the general plan into eight land use districts or two development plan areas where primary urban center, basically Honolulu and Ewa are the directed growth policy, directed growth areas. So all the growth is directed to these areas and that's where our infrastructure investment is concentrated the other six land use districts are rural and urban fringe so it's to keep the country country by moving the development towards you know those two districts and there's specific policies in these land use plans that are incorporated in these regional plans. These regions are very different. And so we are able to tailor each of the regional plans to specific regions. And Act 152 for Watershed Protection, Waihoodeh Ditch Decision, the ordinance chapter 30, our mission, all provide guidance into the plan. And recently the Mayor's Climate Change and Sea Level Rise Directed of 2018, and it was updated in 2022, I believe, brings in guidance on what to do with sea level rise and um the ola oahu resilient strategy is how we make uh the uh a while more resilient to climate change including the facilities but also the resources and so today i'm talking about east home so next so we've adopted the All Fall model in these regional watershed plans. I call it systems thinking, but it could, you know, the way I look at it, the goal is watershed health, holistic resource management, and self-sufficient and sustainable communities. We recognize that there's an interrelationship between Mauka and Makai, including the coastal resources, the conservation districts, the ag zones, the urban zones and the initial waters, but also what happens above ground may affect what's underground in terms of contamination. What sets the O'opwa model apart from traditional integrated research plans is is the stewardship in kuleana that comes with the alpua model around land water people people and culture it's a culture that affects behaviors and by improving those behaviors towards conservation, no waste, recognition of where water comes from, restoration of cultural sites and fish bonds and collo, all of those get folded in into these behaviors so that it basically is the glue that supports what's in the plan. Okay, so next. So our goal is to balance the preservation and restoration management of all watersheds, right, Makatumakai, with the sustainable ground and surface water used in development to serve present and future generations um in chapter one we define this goal we also define the five objectives of which are all um which are applied to all of the regional plans the objectives are defined and they are are are different are defined as our future um state i guess so what does a sustainable watershed look like um so promoting that protecting and enhancing water quality and quantity protecting native Hawaiian rights and traditional customary practices facilitating public participation education and project implementation and this is the behavior side that I was talking about from the all-wound model and then meeting water demands at reasonable costs each of these objectives drive specific policies projects and strategies in each of the eight regions and and if it wasn't you know we tried to make it explicit it's not just happens if you do something we're directly trying to meet these objectives in each of these regional plants okay next so i just wanted to talk about the chapter one next chapter one was basically the um essentially the same format as the first adopted water management plan in 1990. Water code was adopted in 87. So chapter one is the island wide water use and development plan. It also incorporates what the commission did was hire Peter Adler and he came up with the, you know, his Adler report on Oahu needs in 2020. So the format and the organizational structure is very much aligned with that. And this is in every plan. So we talk about authority and purpose framework, which I went through in the water development plan which talks about island-wide demand forecasts supply availability for urban and agriculture conservation existing and planned sources alternatives and transfers and i believe there's a discussion about how we transfer water around the island because we have the infrastructure to do that the other report talked about certain uncertainties such as in-stream and impertinent rights, Hawaiian homeland, alternative source costs, alternative source impacts to aquifers and the recharge rates and pumping effects your streams. What we added here is a contingency section that offers a list of strategies on what to do about it. And so I'd encourage you to read that when the public review draft comes up and I'll get into that in more detail. The plan implementation is how we allocate water, how we invest in infrastructure. You know, the reasonable beneficial uses is defined first through the water use permits, and then we allocate water on a first come first serve basis with an adequate facilities review. I might add that when we do allocate water we also look at reasonable beneficial uses ensure that conservation measures are employed ensure that we require them to connect to recycled water systems if they're adjacent before we can before we issue the meter so it's conditional to those types of uses next so in the uncertainties and contingencies we we um describe what some of the you know all the uncertainties that we could think of that have been affecting planning over the last couple of decades estimating and recovering sustainable yields uh it's it's one foods are talking about estimating sustainable yield. How do we recover that? And you can't recover it all in a lot of places. How does climate change and drought impacts affect recharge and sustainable yield and what to do about it? Contamination, of course. Groundwater dependent ecosystems were brought up in the last administration. So we have a section on that basically sustainable yield is a percent of recharge the the remaining percent is allowed to flow to the ocean uh to support these uh ecosystems uh and that um you know we had some strategies around that um i know there's some interim industry flow standards, effects on stream flows and protection and restoration there, drought impacts the stream flows and the diversions in use. So it's this conjunctive use of using stream diversions and wells in drought times so you can maximize the stream flow, how you can make ditch irrigation systems more efficient through piping the ditches and then uncertainties around urban and agricultural demands urban is fairly you know it's it's you know everybody wants to bank water so they end up having their demands high i see agricultural demands as having a wider range. But anyway, we have these sections where we try to estimate uncertainties and provide some solutions. So on a NILA-wide basis. Okay, the next slides, I'm gonna turn it back over to Abby to get into the East Honolulu Regional Plan. Thank you. Great, thank you so much, Barry, for providing that context. As he mentioned, the remainder with the research and identification of the key water resource issues for the district, then moving into an analysis of both existing and future water supply, and then moving into the development of both the agency and public review draft, and obviously we'll end on the development and adoption of the final plan. Having throughout this process having stakeholder consultations as well as four different community meetings. As a quick note about the schedule, we did begin this process in early 2019. And with this year, at the beginning of the year, we had released the agency review draft, recently integrated feedback from that, and we'll be soon releasing the public review draft and are looking to hopefully have the plan adopted by the end of this year. As mentioned, we've had stakeholder consultations throughout this process with both community organizations that work in the district on various activities related to watershed health as well as county and state agencies in addition to regular neighborhood board presentations to the district's three neighborhood boards in addition to the community meetings that were just mentioned so now i'll be moving into chapter two, which is really sets a foundation for for the plan, as it provides a profile of the district's eight, 10 different watersheds. And so as mentioned, as Barry mentioned, this plan takes a very comprehensive view of watershed health. So this chapter really digs into all the different historical, cultural, environmental factors that impact watershed health. As just as a quick kind of context, the district again encompasses 10 different watersheds and spans from Kahala to Makapu'u. And through our process of both research as well as stakeholder consultations, this chapter two really kind of culminates around eight different water resource issues that kind of rose to the top of the community's priorities in terms of issues that are impacting watershed health in the area and those are including climate change sea level rise near shore water quality flooding and drainage wildfires and others that are listed here and so while i don't have time in this presentation to get obviously into all of those topics i just wanted to highlight within this plan that we do provide both analytical as well as spatial data both analytically and spatially to discuss these different topics that were just mentioned so for example to kind of better understand the both opportunities and challenges for topics such as cultural resources. Our team both mapped out historical and existing resources such as fish ponds, freshwater springs, heiaus, as well as the traditional ahupua'a boundaries. And then as another example to better understand the topic of wildfire hazard, in addition to both mapping out where recent wildfire have occurred, we're also mapping out the wildland urban interface to better understand wildfire vulnerability. And so both of those are just examples to show the type of in-depth analysis that we went through for all the different factors that were presented in in chapter two. So moving on to chapter three, as mentioned, this content is focused on understanding both the existing as well as a future water demand and supply and understanding how that essentially impacts the water source availability for the district so as i'm sure the commission knows East Honolulu area encompasses two different groundwater aquifer system areas the Wai'alae West and Wai'alae East which combined have a relatively low sustainable yield of 4.5 million gallons per day historically over the last about 30 years, the district has used more water per capita than the island wide average. And for example, in 2010, East Honolulu residents on average use about 194 gallons per of water per person per day, which is about 25% higher than the island wide average. So in total, and this map is showing the Board of Water Supply transfers based on 2013 to 2017 averages, the district used an average about 8.38 million gallons per day of Board of Water Supply water, with the majority of that water being supplied by transfers from Honolulu sources, and a smaller amount of that being supplied by transfers from Windward, in addition to in-district pumping, which accounts for about 16% of the Board of Water Supply water demand. Just kind of quickly to note in regards to the water uses, the majority, as you can see here, is for residential uses with a smaller amount going towards commercial uses. And in terms of specific water users of Board of Water Supply Water, the largest user is the Hawaii Kai Gulf Course. So next, moving into future water demand. So to project future water demand, we came up with a range of different scenarios, three different scenarios to project water demand we came up with a range of different scenarios three different scenarios to project water demand in the year 2040 below mid and high and then two different water demand scenarios for the year 2100 just kind of we don't necessarily have the time as here to get into the specific all the specific details of these uh water demand scenarios but the low demand scenario does represent the most probable as it follows the city's population projections as well as the anticipated water conservation efforts whereas efforts, whereas the mid-demand and high-demand scenarios include potential other futures of considering if population were to increase or water conservation were to be decreased in certain ways. Additionally, the ultimate demand scenarios include incorporate factors such as the impacts of sea level of 3.2 feet of sea level rainfall projection as well as the dry rainfall projection. low demand, again, that one being the most probable, would result in an estimated 8.5 million gallons of water used per day, total water usage. And again, the mid and high scenarios are unlikely that they would be proliferated, but we anticipate that in the mid scenario, that would be about 9.6 million gallons per day, and the high would be 11.96 million gallons per day. In summary, based on our analysis of comparing the essentially the water demand with the anticipated water supply in 2040, we have found that in the most probable scenario that there would be existing the existing water supply would be adequate, but that in the high or mid or high demand scenarios that this would require additional water resources or improved a water efficiency similarly in the ultimate demand scenario even though it is obviously more difficult to project out water supply it in at such a great time distance and from 2100 we estimate that under the wet scenario because of because of anticipated increased rainfall that there would be adequate water supply and in the dry scenario that there would need to be improved water efficiency to meet the water demand so kind of all this is to say in terms of our key takeaways from this water analysis, that both kind of under the existing situation as well as the future scenarios, that even though we do project that East Honolulu would have adequate supply under the most probable scenario that due to their limited in-district supply that they have a heightened kuleana to user water efficiently due to the impacts that water transfers can have on the districts that they're being transferred from. So next I'll be moving into chapter four, which is focused on the goals, policies, as well as descriptions of the projects, programs, and strategies to achieve those goals and objectives. So as a quick note regarding how these policies, projects, and strategies are all related, some of those, the water resource issues that were discussed previously in this presentation that were highlighted in Chapter 2, as well as the results of the water demand analysis informed the district sub objectives. From there, the projects with champions, as well as the general strategies, essentially align with those sub objectives and are used to advance advance those policies. And from from from all of those projects emerge the catalyst projects which are essentially the the vehicle being we see as being used to implement the projects and strategies so as a note we have identified 30 different projects with champions so these projects with champions have either an existing community or government champion who has been slated to carry out these efforts and they cover a wide range of activities such as fish pond restoration, hay restoration, coral assistant evolution, invasive species removals, and so forth. And just as again, I wanted to point out that these projects are both site-specific. We have about nine, we have nine projects that are site specific with the remaining 21 projects being focused district-wide. So at a lower tier than the projects, we have the strategies and programs. And so while these activities are also slated to advance the sub-objectives that we've identified in the plan. They do not have an existing project. They do not have an existing community or government champion. However, they're still important for advancing the objectives that were outlined in the plan. So lastly, chapter five five we're moving into implementation so this chapter discusses the water use and development plan so essentially goes into more detail regarding some of the topics discussed in chapter three around the strategies for ensuring water source adequacy for the region, and then goes into the priority watersheds, the catalyst projects, implementation entities, and potential funding. So for the purposes of this presentation, I'll focus on the catalyst projects, which are essentially just a higher priority project that will provide the energy and connectivity for the different projects and programs that we've outlined in this plan. And some of these, some components of these projects will be focused in priority watersheds, which we're defining as watersheds that require special protection for water quality or provide special opportunities for provide implementing watershed management programs so for the Isanalulu watershed management plan we've identified two key Catalyst projects the first of which being to improve water quality in Malauua Bay that's something that just came up over and over again in all of our consultations with community groups as well as our government stakeholders. And so we're looking to focus that catalyst project in the priority watersheds, essentially the six watersheds within the district that feed into the bay. And the second catalyst project being to increase water efficiency and that largely stems from the takeaways of our water demand analysis being that water conservation is really key in the district. So for each of these catalyst projects, we identify identify measurable goals to achieve through these catalyst projects, and some of them being for water quality in Mauna Loa Bay, including reduce the amount of invasive algae, increase the amount of healthy living coral, and so forth. And again, just wanted to emphasize that this Catalyst project, we're focusing the implementation of it within these priority watersheds that feed into the bay. And this Catalyst project, we've identified various different actions to achieve and carry out the catalyst project and many of these actions have actually been previously identified by the Moanalua Watershed Hui, which is essentially a collective of community groups that are working to improve the quality of the bay. So I wanted to highlight, as you can see from that last map, these actions are both located in both Mauka and Makai areas. For example, in the Wailupe watershed, we've identified the Wailupe watershed stream restoration as one of the key actions. In the Neo watershed, in the upper watershed in the upper in in the upper watershed we've identified watershed fencing mid the middle watershed invasive species removal in need of outplanting and then in the lower watershed that invasive algae removal which is being carried out by lalama manalua. Kulea'o, we identified ongoing fish pond restoration, as well as watershed retention and infiltration in the upper watershed. And Ha'aone, we've identified wetland and heiau restoration, which is currently being carried out. And lastly, in the Kamila Nui and Kamila Iki identified a range of actions, including reforestation, the sustainable agricultural pilot project, as well as restoration of Kawapa Pond. So moving now into Catalyst Project number two, again, which is to increase water efficiency in East Honolulu. Again, we identified measurable goals, which include maintaining East Honolulu's per capita water demand through 2040 at 170 gallons per person per day, and then a longer range goal to reduce per capita water demand to 130 gallons per person per day by 2100. So these actions that carry out this Catalyst project are looked at a more district-wide view from both increasing essentially water efficiency from the water distributors as well as the water users. I would say with the exception of the action that we've identified in the Cocoa Head watershed, which is developing R1 recycled water for large irrigation users in Hawaii Kai. So I wanted just to note that within the plan itself, I know it was kind of a very quick overview of a lot of information. But within the plan itself, you know, we want to make this as action oriented as possible. And so we do include essentially a matrix that serves as an action plan and identifies the goals, champions, potential partners, the status, the costs, and target implementation for each of these actions identified as part of the two catalyst projects. So lastly, I wanted to end on just a few updates regarding the public review draft and our timeline for approval. So as our next steps to the public review draft, we are very close to releasing it online. We anticipate making that publicly available by the end of next week on the Board of Water Supply project web page we also are underway in terms of presenting on the public review draft to the district's three neighborhood boards and we'll also be holding a virtual community meeting on on the draft on August 24th from 6 to 8 p.m. And lastly, I wanted to turn it over to back to Barry to provide a little bit more of a detail on on the approval process with the city and the State Commission. Thank you. Thank you, Abby. I just wanted to get through the adoption process. So once we do the public review draft and we clean the comments and revise the plan accordingly, we then submit it, we'll present it to our board, we send it to DPP and the water commission. But I apologize for the complexity of the flow chart on the bottom right, but just to explain the city council adoption this is adopted by ordinance there are five touch points there are three readings first second and third reading the third reading is adoption first reading is just introduction uh in between the the the those readings are two committee meetings and the committee is planning and sustainability. They may be outdated. This is an older graphic. What we're trying to do is have some interaction between the public meetings, the council meetings and the water commission public hearing. And the timeframes historically have been different. So the city council, once we get the neighborhood board endorsements, the city council in the past has processed and adopted the plan within about three months. So we were thinking that if we could notice the public hearing prior to us submitting it to council, and then that the public hearing would then occur such that in the in the first meeting we can say uh we gather input and then at the water commission public hearing we can uh provide that input for the record and then we go to the city council second committee meeting uh the the the input that we get at the water commission's public hearing can then be made record uh of you know in the in the city council process um because what we wanted we didn't want to what we wanted to do is get that interaction before the before the council adopts it as ordinance because once it's adopted as ordinance, it's hard to change. So we want to ensure that there's interaction and there's discussion there. And so after it's adopted by council, then it will be submitted for adoption at the Water Commission. This is what we tried last time. And I think the public hearing occurred after all of the committee meetings. And so, you know, we were lucky that it went through, but anyway, that's what we're trying to do. And so if the staff feels that it's appropriate to notice the public hearing, so that we can time the actual public hearing in alignment with the city council adoption. I think it took six months for the commission because of the 90-day notice so i last the last time so anyway that's that's the approval process and i think that's the last slide there um abby and we're available for questions if they're in a little longer than we thought 30 minutes but that's okay commissioners commissioners any questions oh sorry go ahead um just a quick question given the uh what barry said about this um east honolulu having the highest per capita water use and then in the east honolulu plan that there wasn't um and i'm curious why there isn't more aggressive reduction of per capita water use um because it's not aligning for me what Barry said and what Abby said on the projected demand being um stable or decreasing. And then. Sorry, my words are not coming together. I'm a little tired. So basically, why is there not more aggressive reduction of per capita water use in the plan? We were tying the reduction in per capita based on the amount of supply that we thought we would have. So what we did was in a water research foundation study, we took the USGS recharge rates and and applied that to the UH 2100 forecast or rainfall forecast rate. One wet, one dynamical was wet, statistical was dry. And then we calculated roughly what the sustainable yields would be in both scenarios. So in the low, I mean, in the dry scenario, the sustainable yields dropped by something in the range of 30%. And so reducing the amount of supply available to East Honolulu, we felt that bringing it down to 130 per capita would be sufficient for the demand to align with what we think the supply may be. Now, these are scenarios. It's 80 years away. There's going to be other evaluations of sustainable yield. There are other cities that can go to 100 per capita. And in fact, when you see primary urban center, because of the density, we think we can go down to 100. But in East Honolulu, there's a lot of large properties, a lot of swimming pools out there, so it's harder to get it lower. But if you can get the golf course off the potable system and onto the recycled water, that'll do a lot there. Wildlife golf courses has their own well, but the effluent at the Hawaii Kaiwai Swart Treatment Plant is salty. You know, they have to desalinate that. And the sea level rise it's going to make it worse so it'll be challenging but we tied it to what we thought was the the available supply okay so larry so basically your answer is that to east on the blue is that you're only going to get a certain amount of water and you got to live with that that's why you're getting a decrease um yeah and and historically it has been decreasing down from 190 the 170 is when we started to calculate the 2020 uh numbers um they're actually at 170 now and so they can get a little bit lower with our rebates and stuff but that's how we would do that rather than desalination because we're doing that you know in eva so instead of increasing or augmenting the supply it's easier to just try to get their demand down to what what we think would be available i got a question oh go ahead neil uh i couldn't go through the list of stakeholders consulted fast enough to see what's coming schools on that list the largest private landowner it should be yeah they they own the majority of the golf they own the golf courses that there is that golf course uh lease renewal kind of part of their is that an assumption yes has there been discussion with them to see if that's the highest and best use of that land in terms of their unique mission um no we didn't talk about as far as i remember we didn't talk about changing or you know closing the golf course it was trying to supply with an alternative source you might want to just broach the discussion with them i'm not saying it's an easy to it's an easy uh there's a lot of reliance and acceptance of the golf course but given their mission what it provides for their mission is fairly limited in relationship to the impact of this being the largest water user in that area. And now granted, yeah, if they could get off potable, that would be helpful to this equation. But same token, that's a lot of land that might be, have a more powerful contribution to their mission if redeployed. I'm gonna be a little bit more candid than my fellow commissioners. And maybe because I'm tired. It's been a long morning. Sorry, it took so long. No, no, no, no, no. It was extremely informative, but I'm putting on my DLNR hat. You know, your, this report, it just emphasized the disparate treatment. We ask, I mean, here we are assuming that that golf course and we can let East Honolulu continue to take more water than the rest of the island. And we are not I mean, when I look at your catalyst number one, that are that's all conservation environmentalist cultural groups who are willing to put you know I don't know who's funding all of this I suspect they're all going out and getting private funds. They're getting federal funds. But I do not see a like response by your largest users. The swimming pool guys, the golf course guys. I mean, but it just, when I look at one end of the island, I look at Leeward Oahu, everything is getting dumped over there. And those guys on the Leeward side, they have very little bit of water for agriculture, which is sustainable. But on East Honolulu, we're paying for swimming pools and a golf course. I mean, I am sorry, because I struggle with that DLNR. I mean, DLNR, we are struggling with water management watershed management plans. How our struggle is, how do we charge the users an equitable amount for their impacts to our watersheds? And I guess I just I'm frustrated because I don't see a like kind of appreciation when, you know, here in, I don't, I guess I just don't see that there is a measurable response to those who are using the most, but yet I've got all these nonprofit groups running out there trying to get money to do these wonderful projects and I don't see government trying to you know tell tell I think you know it's like Neil says maybe Kamehameha Schools has to rethink that or maybe the swimming pools but I don't know Barry and Abby is there i mean what what kind of efforts is bws you know do you do we just ask nicely or do or do we just turn off the stick i mean like i said i'm tired this has been kind of a long morning but again i'm struggling at dll because we have the same issues and i'm trying to tell these large landowners, you gotta pay, you have to pay for watershed management on East Maui. Right. How is this equitable here? Good question. Two things I'd say, we're going into the next water rate increase in the next month. And, you know, the golf courses, the three golf courses that irrigate with potable water right now from our system, they're going to, you know, they make a lot of business. I don't know. It's going to increase their water costs. They're going to have to raise rates. And so that may be a way to, certainly when prices go up, people use less and they've been trying to use less. I know the golf course provides an income stream to come in schools to further their educational mission. They have the, they own the areas around Cocoa Marina as well. You know, those commercial properties. In fact, there was a presentation last night at the Hawaii Neighborhood Board where, led by I guess Michelle Sportman and her team on revisioning their entire properties, you know, in East Honolulu. Most of the lands are mauka, as Commissioner Hannes knows. And they're trying to forward in culture, but also supply funding for their educational needs. So they're just starting in that process. Those are real good questions. What's gonna happen with the golf course um that's we we kind of in a plan we tried to react to that we did do a um an investigation on recycled water for the golf course this is with american water which is a private company that owns the wastewater treatment plant and the and the previous owners of the golf course. And it wasn't economically feasible. They need an influx of grants or something to put in that treatment so they could use it. But we were trying to help, well, I was trying to help that discussion. But I hear what you're saying. There is an equity issue there, but they're gonna have to pay the higher rates like everybody else, and the big users are gonna feel it, and they're gonna have to conserve more or pay the bill. I'll be clear, Barry, especially with my background, I would not wanna see Kamehameha schools treated unfairly or in this this but i i think they have the potential to be a catalyst project as well and it but it's going to take dialogue and you've got good people like michelle and uh there to work with just gotta you know catalyze you know make that that dialogue happen and see what happens and see where it goes we'll express that to them aurora um going off of chair chang's comment um given east honolulu's reliance on transfers our projects i mean how is Board of Water Supply kind of addressing the dependence of the district on other water management areas that can't reap the benefits of these particular projects? Like, is there a way, because it's probably the income, disparity of East Honolulu versus Ewa, is there consideration of that kind of trans boundary reliance and an ability to build in sort of reciprocity in that to support, to recognize the reliance of East Honolulu on conservation activities say in Honolulu or Kuala Lumpur to maintain their subsidized water supply? You know, it would have been easy to just say, we'll just get more water from Windward, but it's just not there. So they have to pull their load, you know, that concept of Kuleana, that one slide, they need to be more efficient. We did it, we also have two well projects in the Waialae West and Waialae East, Alka-Ferst 2, to supplement. So it's not only relying on transfers and conservation. There are two small well projects that we have on the books. But yeah, in the Koolau Poko and K poco and cola law watershed plans that there's a policy in those plans about the transfer of water out of these districts shall not be detrimental to these districts that's the only way we could get some the plans adopted and endorsed by the neighborhood boards there so that message was communicated to East Honolulu. What we got back was like, hey, we're conserving, you know, and well, yeah, but you can conserve more. We have a rebate program for rain, you know, rain barrels. The stormwater utility is going. They're very interested in in green infrastructure and trying to recharge the aquifer too so the community there is very surprising they're very motivated and very active in their activities around the coast and and in these cultural sites and um you know so more so than i see in other other communities too. It's just a big users like, I think Commissioner Hannes was talking about and Chair was talking about. And we can probably talk to them and see how that can be resolved. They tried developing sources. It's all salty aquifer water, so it's not very irrigatable. But anyway, it's just what aquifer water so it's not very irritable but anyway is this what we've done so far sorry follow-up quick question yes you remember the board of water supply is a member of the watershed partnerships yes the coal mountain watershed partnerships yes and and does that mean financial like support of those efforts so that is in some way redistributing yes we provide annual funding to because of act 152 and because we created a stakeholder advisory group with folks like mark fox in there you know the big advocates for watershed protection um we're funding about 300 000 plus to to the Coal, and the Wai'anae Mountain Watershed Partnerships, as well as the Wild and Basis Species Committee. And some funding also is going to Dillanard Doe Fall. Four on the ground projects, invasive species control, Iconia, albiza removal, fencing. And that's an annual thing that we continue to do with our budget. So in a way, the rates are funding that investment in the mauka so that we can continue to make the forest healthier. By the way, we're highlighting Kamehameha Schools tenants use of the water, but Kamehamement schools is probably also your largest contributor statewide to watershed partnership investment of any organization. So . And I guess Barry and Abby, I think one policy that I see missing is environmental justice. Since you have an island wide, while you have these eight water management, it is an island wide system that you have. There should be some level of environmental justice that perhaps how you allocate the costs. I mean, you know, again, it just kind of pains me when I think about the agricultural users down the West End who are asked to conserve. Or we may not even have water for ag, but yet on the east side, we've got, and I'm sure they're motivated. I'm sure they're doing their best and they're trying but I think there's got to be some policy that drives a more equitable both distribution either distribution of water or distribution of costs so that you know some of these these other areas maybe their water rates are less because they're using less. I don't know. I don't know. But this slide, this presentation, I'm sorry, was a stark reality check that I don't know if a lot of people, you know, see the stark disparity in East Honolulu versus West west honolulu and i know you guys are caught between a rock and a hard place but i mean i think we as government have got to try to do do do things differently when we can see such disparity and um i mean that we got all these guys on the west on the west and on know, they're on like drought and water conservation so but I, I am not. I'm not just criticizing you guys I mean I think we're off base with this. But I would, if you're referring to the per capita demand and higher than the average, you know, they are, but they're not the highest, you know, North Shore and Waianae actually are higher because of the diversified ag that we serve off of our system. But certainly they have capacity, East Honolulu should have that capacity to use less. Right, right, right. You're right. Maybe we need to focus our incentive program to these hotspots perhaps, but I think the big ticket items are the large users and addressing that may go a longer way than, I mean, both strategies work. But thanks for the feedback on the environmental justice and climate equity as well too. You know, that's the same kind of concept too, right? In the 2100, in the sea level rise, the demand goes down because they got to move away from the coast. It's going to be all flooded, right? That's the same thing that's going to happen in PUC is that with six feet of sea level rise the water demand goes down i don't know where they're gonna go but they cannot stay there right so you know that's some of the things we're tossing around what is a what is a viable scenario to to um apply um but that kind of thing they're going to be really impacted in nissan because all those rituals on the coast especially in kuleola in that area that's really the hot spot of the of the sea level rise so um but those are you know 80 years 50 to 80 years away thank you very much any any other questions commissioners is there anybody in the boardroom or on the public that has a question? Oh, there is one 70 gallons per capita. You're taking the total use and dividing it by the population. Yeah, sure. And those are really like apples and oranges. If you're talking about the golf, big users, and then you're talking about North Shore being really high but there's very few people in the north shore i think you need a better uh comparison it's very deceptive and i think i think it's making east honolulu look really bad when it's probably not the household users that are doing I just want to point out that just the issues with using an average is very misleading as it's being pointed out. There are a lot of densely populated parts of East Honolulu and I know because I live out there that don't use much water for irrigating landscaping and they don't own a pool. There are a few neighborhoods that are very less, is much less dense. I mean, homes on 30,000 square feet or more, and they have lavish landscaping and they do have swimming pools. And I'm happy to hear that there's a potentially a new rate structure because the the there are neighbors of mine that are using 500 gallons per day or per person per day or more and I think my house is down to 94. I just kind of figured it out. So I'm very happy about that. But the average doesn't necessarily tell the whole story. So yes, thank you. Yeah, we have an inverted block rate for residential because there's an essential needs tier that's the lowest rate. And the more water you use, the higher the rate it gets. So, you know, it's going to get even higher if you adopted the rates. The non-residential rate, though, is flat because of the big diversity in commercial and non-residential uses. But they'll definitely feel it. It's over $5. When I started it was $1.77 per thousand. Now it's like $5.20. So it's just trying to do everything while the costs are going up. And we realize that folks are being squeezed too at the grocery store and all of that inflation and stuff. But anyway, those are the dynamics that work there. I think though they work towards more efficiency and to the extent that we can help with our incentive program, it's called WaterSensible. We can help to quicken that piece so by the way i want to offer my four rain barrels in kalu to anybody he's so he's uh wow since it's always overflowing and we don't need them pick him up on it jerry pick him up on it i have one last him up on it. I have one last. Yes, go ahead. As a renter, I would be really interested in understanding how the board considers renters who don't see a water bill, who may not be incentivized to conserve. And so if, and given the, like, I don't know what the population that rents is, you know, like making sure that that kind of maybe is more directly communicated versus via jacking up rents, you know, that people can be engaged and aware. All of my students, if I ask them, how many of them pay a water bill, none of them raised their hands. So, you know, just really connecting to the population that rents that doesn't understand the- Yeah, it's an ongoing challenge. It's hard to reach customers that are renters that don't see the bill. Yeah. Correct. We're wrapping up social media and and all of that and trying to get to them but it's it's challenging can i can i just add something real quick maybe for the commission to consider i mean the board so um here thanks for the presentation barry it's always good to see how the board is kind of taking a lead on this aqua model and the behaviors and values that go with it but kind of similar to what cher said they kind of totally don't exist in this east honolulu watershed man there's just conflict between the value set of sustainable self-sustaining communities when you see this massive transfer of water from outside of your community into your community, and then the high use. But just maybe something to consider, you know, as a pop we are in a water management area right and the Commission does while we issue water use curious from the board's perspective in strategies of of water supply to manage their end uses. If there's complications in seeing conservation, as kind of chair mentioned from those end users. Is that something that the commission should be considering in terms of its review of its water use permit to the board and or those end users that are benefiting from that allocation. Just, you know, that's a policy or a strategy or tool that I'm curious whether you've considered. It obviously would put a potential restriction on you as the holder of that permit, but if there isn't an incentive or disincentive to change behavior, is that something that should be considered by this body? Thank you for your comment, Kaleo. Maybe we can start with a presentation one day, informational on our conservation program and all the different facets. You're talking about certain tactics and incentives on how to do that. We've been expanding it as as we as as much as we can maybe we can just start there and then maybe the um you know the gaps that you see are not fast enough and we can kind of you know react to it or discuss that um i think we're doing quite a bit but it's a matter of focus um so that we focus on the high high water users um and you know we can if the commission is is also saying that they support and are you know expecting uh you know greater efficiency um that may i don't know if that would move the needle but um at least start with where we where we're at now and where we think we're gonna go and and uh if if you folks willing we we'd be happy to make a presentation yeah and i think that's good i think it's also also just you come up with long-term strategies as part of this plan, right? And as a planner, 2100 may seem a long time away, but it is far to see that reduction from 170 to 130 as a catalyst project. But in the interim, are there other strategies and tools that maybe this body can support in its implementation towards conservation efforts, right? So, you know, we can have, and we probably should have that dialogue before this body so that we can understand what you're currently doing, what the ultimate goal is, and if there are additional tools that you can employ or support you with as the regulator, right, as the trustee of water here in the state. So thank you. Thanks for the presentation. Nope. I think Barry and Abby and state so thank you thanks for the presentation nope i think barry and abby and france thank you so much i think this is a great presentation good um it's good information so thank you i think with that we're going to take a lunch break it's 105. are you guys okay with coming back at 1 30 because there's two action items. Okay, so we're gonna take a break at we're gonna take a lunch break, and we'll come back at 1 30. Thank you, everybody. Thank you again, Barry and Abby. Thank you. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Thank you. We're here in the boardroom. again when you are you're new sorry thank you i'm ready too i hope you all had a good lunch hold on one second while we get set up on our camera all right I will let you. Let's just see. I'm gonna. We have a contest the cases together. New York Times saying global tipping point is closer than one spot let me um i gotta make sure you guys have a little bit of fashion you see that the water off off of florida is 100 degrees. It's changing the current. The current is, you know, so it's not moving now. The naked hurricanes over there. The heat of the water and it's just gonna... I can't believe what's happening to the whole US. Flood over here, drought over there, tornadoes and places that never happened before. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. were flawed over here and dropped over there tornadoes and places have never happened before chair of the board for pbs trying to bring attention i was going around the world and now we're going around the Pacific. Okay, Kaleo. Hold on one second. All right. And you wanna sit back there? Up to you. You can stay there, it's fine fine okay yeah you're good okay wait hold on check out a call that meeting back okay um we're back in session it's 1 37 p.m thank you board members so the next item on the agenda is item c1 it is an action item request to authorize a chairperson to enter into a joint funding agreement with usgs to conduct the seepage analysis on waikoloa stream island of hawaii aaron thank you chair aaron strauch with the stream protection and management branch i'm going to briefly do a presentation on the background and reasoning why we're funding this specific stream streamflow analysis for seepage run i also want to add that in the title is to declare the project is exempt from the environmental assessment requirements under hrs chapter 243 and har chapter 11-200.1. So to take a step back, current and future priority in-stream flow standards. We have been working diligently in East Maui and West Maui throughout the last decade or so. We have in-stream flow standards in West Kauai, North and South Shores, and we are currently working to develop them in Southeast Hawaii. Last year, we established in-stream flow standards on Moloka'i, and in 2020 and 2021, we established in-stream flow standards in Kaukonohua, and then the Waialae-Ditch-Kontoske has established them in the Waialae area. The Waikoloa stream on the Big Island, can you see my cursor? Anyway, this blue segment on the Big Island is our, and Waialua on Kauai, are two areas of focus right now where we have developed an in-stream flow standard assessment report which is the compilation of best available information and we are working with the water users and the community to develop an in-stream flow standard or interim stream flow standard that protects public trust uses. Here is the draft in-streamarrative assessment report that we published online in june and we have sent out notices via email to stakeholders throughout the waikoloa and hawaii island region we have a landing page for the in-stream post-narrative report online. The report utilizes a seepage run conducted by the US Geological Survey in 2021, which measured seepage gains and losses through the main stem of Waikoloa stream from its headwaters is this stream grant. Sorry, you can't see my pointer. Are you full screen by the way? Where is it? We'll just do this, this little thing, this little share screen, part two. And you can use the pointer, you can access it. Bigger. So it's a little bit easier to see. And then you can actually see your pointer now on screen too. Oh, okay. So the Waikolo stream headwaters starts in the Kohala protected or watershed protected area managed by DOFA and then flows down through Waimea town all the way out through and the lower reach is actually referred to and the stream is gaining flow up the Malacca areas and it gains flow in this region of Waimea Town, but it's losing principally between the stream diversion that feeds the county water supply and where the geology transitions. So, there we go. Okay, so here's the underlying geology. Again, these green dots are the measurement sites. The orange line is the stream where it's losing. and then the transition from the Javi volcanics to the Pololu volcanics or Hamakua volcanics, sorry, is where it moves from, or the stream transitions from losing to gain. So it actually gains streamflow in this region. And this unique geology, we'd like to confirm that this streamflow is losing and the rate of loss and then it's gaining at the rate of gain because it has implications for meeting the public trust needs of this stream particularly this region just below lalamilo homesteads. This agricultural area has a historic away system, multiple historical systems, and we have an informal complaint at this stage that there is insufficient water and to meet the traditional practices of the agriculture in the area this stream also runs through a number of parks and provides aesthetic and recreational value this stream was also identified in the USGS water resource management monitoring needs assessment published in 2020 particularly this seepage run right here this blue line that's highlighted by USGS as a point that needs to be monitored as understanding surface water groundwater interactions in this region has implications for groundwater recharge as well. um to uh place this in the context of previous seepage runs funded by the uh the water commission in um uh 2018 funding for the low flow statewide low flow project a number of west maui stream seepage runs were funded in 2020 the commission uh approved funding for a number of west uh lahaina side of west maui um uh see the drawings and then here on uh in 2023 we're funding the white below stream secret run um because we are fiscally constrained we cannot just fund all stream flow um are all streams identified as priority streams for secret joints but where the data are needed to make management decisions we are going stream by stream essentially that's all I have for a presentation um the um requests of the the staff recommendations which are to authorize the chairperson to enter into a joint funding agreement between the commission on water resource management from the u.s geological survey to collect and um to conduct seepage analysis for one high priority stream for a period of one year until june 20 june 30 2024 the joint funding agreement in the amount of 21 300 will be shared by the commission for 11 300 and the u.s geological survey for ten thousand dollars um to authorize the chairperson to make such further amendments or modifications of the contract agreement consistent with the terms set forth above, as may be necessary to accomplish the goals described here, provided that any amendment or modification does not require additional commission funding. 3. Request that Hawaii Department of Water Supply comply with any stream diversion operational needs USGS deems necessary to conduct a successful secret run, and four, declare that the project is exempt from EA requirements under HRS Chapter 343 and HAR Chapter 11-200.1. Are there any questions? No, not a question, but it was fascinating. East Mauiel when you talked about the different characteristics of the geology so between Hamakua and Avi what are the different characteristics so there are perch water bodies the Javi volcanics tend to be thin and and purge provide some level of purchase water by which contributes to last spring flow. And but why that particular area of the stream in the hobby volcanics is losing. It is not yet determined. But one of the reasons why we're doing the secret drone again, most of these volcanics are tend to be pretty porous. And so but that there is a high elevation region where the Kohala volcanic shield building phase and the Mauna Kea shield building phase overlapped. And so there's somewhat unique geology, especially in Waimea shield building phase and the Mauna Kea shield building phase overlapped. And so there's somewhat unique geology, especially in that Waimea town region that has higher elevation groundwater. And that's known, there are a number of DWS wells that take advantage of that high elevation groundwater forging water supply but it also clearly contributes to sustaining stream flow to some extent so it's just a really unique location and there have been the the biota data that are available demonstrates the stream supports native amphidromis species. We know it supports a lot of recreational values. And this region has this heavily concentrated in in archaeological sites that relate to agriculture, both cool cool, a dryland diverted and what percentage is that at the base flow? Great question. So the capacity of the diversion off the top of my head is somewhere I think 2.5 mgd between 2 and 3 mgd and that is 100% of base base flow um historically it went all the way down to the ocean yes how far down are those people with the agriculture lots um they're just below uh waimea town not far i mean it's pretty high up maybe just one thing that this would be one of the only the streams that we potentially restore mauka to makai from upolu to puna basically going to be the only perennial stream that this commission could balance on and see full stream restoration or any space flow restoration that supports um that type of ecological um support and why may our town has no other source currently no they they they have two high elevation groundwater wells that could meet most of their needs. It's just cost. It's way cheaper to utilize surface. Recommendation number three regarding Department of Water Supply. So what kinds of requirements do you have of them? We just want them to be cooperative with USGS. There isn't a specific requirement necessarily other than maybe don't adjust things during the day while they're trying to measure. They just want, we just need them to be cooperative. And you're gonna coordinate with them. I mean, this is not an unusual request. Right. Okay. And the other second question I had is, who are the users of this stream? In terms of domestic water supply? Yeah. Or the. Is that. So I mean, if there's diversions, who's who are the major diverter? The two primary diversions that are on the books are Parker Ranch. They have a two inch pipeline that takes an unknown amount of water because they did not, they have not metered their system. But we have been engaging with them and they are, they have ordered the meters and they are working on installing them as we speak. And the county department of water supply. Back in the 40s, Meridian Dam was built to supply the Army's drinking water needs for during, or post World War II training in the region. And that then was, is now utilized by the county for drinking water. That and diversion on um which both contribute to the reservoir system above Waimea town okay very good any other questions do I have a motion? So moved. Do I have a second? All right. A motion has been moved and seconded to approve the chairperson entering into a joint fact-finding agreement as well as the EA exemption. All in favor, please say aye. Maybe, Chair, before the vote, just to note for the record that there's nobody present in the room or online for testimony, just for the record. Usually Colin is the one who reminds me about that. He is reminding us in the corner. He's always so good about i always forget that so yes um let me just ask is there anyone in the room or on zoom that would like to testify on this matter okay hearing none a motion has been made and seconded all in favor please say aye aye aye aye and mr katayama, are you on the, are you? Commissioner Katayama is not here. He had to leave for the afternoon. So we have a quorum. Okay, we have quorum. Okay, so there has been a unanimous vote of the five members present. Mr. Katayama did not return after lunch. Okay, thank you. We're gonna now move on to item C. 2 request to authorize a chairperson to enter into a joint funding agreement with Usgs to collect and enter into site-specific water use information and hoist statewide. Did this also include the Ea exemption? Aaron? Yes, okay, and the ea exemption aaron uh yes okay and the ea exemption all right very good presentation by the staff um thank you chair this is aaron strauss with the stream protection management branch um item c2 is to uh request to authorize the chairperson to enter into joint funding agreement with us geological survey to collect and enter site-specific water use information for Hawaii and declare that the project is exempt from EA requirements. There is no formal presentation, although I will give a little bit of background information. At five-year intervals nationwide, USGS collects water use data to characterize water use across the nation in a comprehensive and consistent manner for comparative purposes and to make recommendations at the federal level. In Hawaii, we've not had sufficient monitoring in major areas of water use for many, many years. We have gotten much better in the last, since I was hired in 2014. And the major users such as hydropower and agriculture irrigation have now, at least at the largest scales, are now monitoring their systems much more effectively. There was a lot of information being gathered during the plantation era, but following the collapse of the plantation systems and the managers that knew how to monitor and manage effectively and just record the data. We lost many decades of information, but now USGS is wanting to gather the information we have and enter it within their system. and they have federal funding to do this this is a no-cost agreement to the commission we just need to be the local partner in in this effort and because the commission already gathers the data from drinking water systems while surfacing groundwater data from irrigation systems while surfacing groundwater data from our systems. Now that we've really worked statewide to get water users to report consistently. This is this data are not these data are now available for us to bring into their system, to code it to their level of, to make it consistent for their federal and countrywide analysis. So with that, the staff recommends that the commission authorize the chairperson to enter into a joint funding agreement between the commission on water resource management and the US Geological Survey to collect and enter site-specific water use information for the state of hawaii this jfa will be funded solely by the usgs with no cost to the commission to authorize the chairperson to catch further amendments and modifications to the contract agreement as may be necessary to accomplish the goals described here provide that any amendment or modification does not require additional commission funding and three declare that the project is exempt from ea requirements under hrs chapter 243 and hdr chapter 11-200.1 very good thank you aaron commissioners any questions um how does it do you have good data even in undesignated areas yes so from um you know i i won't speak for groundwater although i do know that they have done a lot of outreach statewide to get um small groundwater wells to report even though i believe domestic wells aren't required to report is that accurate right right now that's not the focus yeah the focus is on the larger users okay um and we have pretty good um reporting from all the larger users from a surface water site, certain users we've been getting consistent data for like East Maui irrigation or Wailuku water because that information has been tied to contested cases. Other systems, it's been much more recent, like Department of Agriculture systems are on the Big Island or the Molokai irrigation system. They were not monitoring their delivery system. They were gathering metered end use data. So we have that available, based back now that maybe a decade or so. um the commission staff has installed and maintained monitoring stations for these systems um as a um because they weren't going to be able to do it so um we've also worked with large private irrigation system operators whether it's mauriland pine whether it's um grove farm kaw whether it's Grove Farm, Kauai Ranch, Kikaha Ag, which is ADC system, to develop monitoring programs and to help them maintain them. All the hydropower plants now are reporting their tailrace data to us, which is a big win because now we have at least one sector of their, you know, the categories that USGS utilizes accomplished. I believe all drinking water systems that rely on surface water now also report their water use to us. So Seaworm will ingest it and pass it to USGS to organize and display and make available for everyone and it alleviates the workload. The USGS will coordinate with us on how they access the data, whether we set them up with the terminal in the office or we just compile a lot of spreadsheets and send them over there. We'll figure the logistics out later, but basically they're going to fund the gathering and coding and analyzing of the data. The other thing I noticed in the submittal was that there's this untapped source of funding that we could potentially use in the future, the water use data and research program. So will that help sustain kind of the effort moving forward? Small line, maybe this is not- moving forward small line maybe yeah I mean in general I will say that Katie Roth with our planning program has been taking the lead on looking at how to double down on our our state funding by looking at accessing federal funding where we're applicable and as appropriate and so we are evolving, right, in our access of federal resources. We have historically not accessed a lot of them, but that's something that we're open to as they align, right, with our priorities or the things that we've been currently working on. I just want to say this is great because it's gonna help us do water shortage planning with real data assistance technical assistance from usgs excited questions i'm sorry anything more any other questions commissioners any members of the public either in the room or on zoom have any questions all right with that do I have a motion motion to approve the second motion has been made and seconded to approve staff recommendation all in favor say aye motion passes unanimously next time we are putting staff action items first thing on the agenda. You guys did it in 20 minutes two agenda aaron you're going to be on the top of the list thank you thank you good presentation efficient all right kaleo do you want to do item number 10. um no just that our next commission meeting is uh planned for august 15th uh so save that on your calendar and thank you for your flexibility and july's meeting reschedule um but we will see you folks in a couple weeks so thank you that's it chair thank you um commissioner mieke welcome on board did you want to say anything being the first your first meeting as long as you have your meetings not on Wednesdays, I'm fine. Not on Wednesdays. Good for me too. Wednesday is my trip to Kona. Oh, okay. Okay. But this week was fine. He gave me enough warning. Thank you. Thank you. Okay. Yep. Kalea will work for Nika. Thank you, everybody. I appreciated your patience with me as well. The meeting is adjourned. Thank you. Awesome. I appreciated your patience with me as well. The meeting is adjourned. Thank you. Awesome. Bye-bye. Awe ho. All right.