 they have positions and they have kawaii and they have a walk in oahu you have coffee line you have straw and polymers well it's pretty mission okay are we ready okay very good. Thank you. Thank you. Let me know when. the government that was ugly first uh commission me i had to wear pants for a long time and shoes and shoes oh yeah shoes and socks okay we got the socks man there's no rule on socks okay and they got a match it looks so official all of us. Oh my gosh. We're live? Uh, yeah. Go ahead, Chair. Kathy, we're good? Okay. Aloha mai kakou. My name is Dawn Chang and I am chair of the water commission very thank you very much for joining us today this is the june 20th 2023 meeting of the commission on water resource management it is now nine or three we are holding this meeting as a hybrid meeting some of us are here in person actually most of us in in the Kalani Moku building boardroom in Honolulu, and we are also holding this meeting remotely via Zoom, and it can be watched live on YouTube. For those who are here to testify in Zoom, we will let you into the meeting when we will be hearing the item you wish to testify on please remember to turn off your youtube when you are in the main zoom meeting room or we will get an echo when you enter please be sure to keep your camera off microphone muted until the commission calls on you for your public testimony we ask that members of the public testifying on agenda items limit your testimony to three minutes so that we can get to get to hear it from everyone and please remember not to use the chat for any comments because that presents a sunshine issue people may also testify via telephone at the number posted online please let our commission secretary know your name and what agenda item you are here to testify on. You can also email your testimony via email kathy.s.yoda at hawaii.gov or dlnr.cwrm at hawaii.gov. For all meeting participants, I would like to stress the importance of speaking slowly. I am now going to read the contested case statement for the record. If I can find it. Yikes. Back with the agenda. I found it. I found it. In some of the matters before the commission, a person may wish to request a contested case hearing. If such a request is made before the commission's decision, then the commission will consider the request first before considering the merits of the item before it. A person who wants to contest the case may also wait until the Commission decides the issue, then request a contested case after the decision. It is up to you. Any request may must be made orally by the end of the meeting and followed up by written writing within 10 days if no request for contested case is made the commission will make a decision the department will treat the decision as final and proceed accordingly all right i am now going to take roll call of the commissioners i will go first in those that are present in the room. We'll start first with Wayne. Wayne Cartagena. Neil Hannix. Don Chang. Michael Buck. Aurora Kagawa-Suziani. Joanna Seto for the Department of Health. And I also have on the line um do we do we not have yeah oh okay i'm sorry wayne meyer is excused so we actually call my i am going to get it together i'm just so excited because i've got my book slated next to me but i apologize um so our commissioner mr meyer is not here today so all of the commissioners are here in the boardroom and we actually have a reason why we're all here today is because today is commissioner mike buck's last meeting let's give him a round of applause. We are extremely grateful for the time that Mike has been here. I mean, Mike has been here both, he sat on the other side of the table as a member of Dale and our staff for many years, retired, thought he was going off into the sunset and do farming, but we pulled him back to sit on the water commission we've been extremely grateful for his eight years eight years um this won't be the last time we see mike i suspect we are going to find an opportunity for our paths to cross again um taking mike's place will be a a new commissioner who is who is new but not necessarily new to the commission larry miiki so he'll join us at the meeting in july but thank you again on behalf of both the department and the commission mike for your years of dedicated service and for providing this commission. I've read through many minutes, just great guidance here. So thank you very much. I'd also like to introduce staff. Kaleo, if you could introduce your staff. Hello, Chair, Commission, Kaleo Manning, Deputy Water Commission in person. We have Katie Roth, who's the head of our planning branch. We also have Dr. Aaron Strout, who is with our instrument protection branch. We also have Kathy Yoda, who is TA into our commission secretary position. And then we have Alexa Taika, she's our legal fellow, Ann and Barrett, obviously with our IT. And then online, we have Ryan Imata, head of our groundwater regulation branch, and then Dean Lueno, head of our stream protection and management branch. And at that time, I think that's all staff present. Thank you very much. We also have President Deputy Attorney General Miranda Steve thank you Miranda so with that um we do have an agenda I don't believe we're taking anything out of order Kathy we're going in the order of the agenda okay so commissioners the first item on the agenda is item a1 it is the approval of the minutes of june it is the approval of the minutes of may 16 2023 are there any written testimony kathy on this agenda item okay um anybody here in the public to testify not seeing any any comments or questions by the board members on the minutes of may 16 2023 i just have minor correction of some acronyms and grammar okay so um we'll be working on the words very good send it to kathy thank you very much any other comments or questions to the minutes do i have a motion to approve the minutes as um with minor corrections so good the question has been moved and seconded to approve the minutes of may 16 2023 we're going to take a roll call vote kathy do you guys usually do that for the first one okay we'll take a roll call vote wait oh go ahead approved michael buck Michael Buck. Approved. JoAnna, I'm sorry, Obermann-Sandell and Viviani. Approved. JoAnna Stinson. Approved. Chair Kenney. Approved. Thank you very much. The meeting minutes of May 16, 2023 have been approved. Next item on the agenda is item B1. It is the adoption of the Maui Water Development Plan. If you can put the testifiers into the Zoom room and we'll call you when we're ready to take public testimony. Thank you, Katie. So we'll take a staff uh staff um presentation thank you good morning good morning katie rock planning program manager of the commission um item b1 is the adoption of the mallee iron water use and development plan for incorporation with the whole water plan you may remember a few months ago back in March staff gave an overview of this exact submittal um in the plan itself so in the interest of time I'm not going to go into the details that were presented them but that is available um that that recording is available on our video site um those that that presentation included an overview of some of the major themes and concerns Sarah de Guia And then the staff recommendation on page 11 includes the underlying items that you'll see. I wanted to highlight that after they marched to the first presentation, that were identified we really wanted to make sure that we addressed them sufficiently so that we could come to you today with recommendations and an item that you felt comfortable improving knowing that we had done our due diligence and additional outreach so some of the recommendations you see have been tweaked slightly based on those conversations with certain stakeholders and the county. I guess at this time I would just say that staff believes that the the planet itself meets all the statutory requirements that work in the State water code, and it sufficiently addresses the recommended elements in the hawaiian water plan framework pertaining to updates county water use and development plans so we feel that the plan you see today is sufficient and meets every other requirements needed to be approved i will reiterate the recommendation so we have that on record staff recommends that the commission adopt the maui island wire use and development plan for appropriation into the Hawaii Water Plan. Commission staff will also commit to work with the County of Maui on the following. 1. Maui DWS will hire a consultant to write a Maui Island Water Use and Development Plan summary document of the plan for public consumption. The summary document should clearly articulate what charts, figures, tables tables and data have been amended and when relevant provide links to the updated data source two commission and maui dws will incorporate the findings of the usgs study on climate impact to groundwater recharge into water planning documents including the maui island water use and development plan and updated sustainable yields three maui dWS will organize meetings annually with the Keiki Nui, Hana, Ko'olau, Central Lahaina, and Waialuku aquifer sector stakeholder groups to better quantify water needs of residents, including traditional Kuleana users, rural residents, and small farmers. Feedback and data from these meetings will be incorporated into a future update of the Maui Island Water Use and Development Plan. Maui DWS will report back to the Commission within one year with an update on the status of the USGS ideological study of the Haiku aquifer. And five, Commission staff will continue to work with Maui DWS to support development of their water conservation programs including water loss control components that implement the findings of completed annual water audits. I'd also like to mention that we have council member, Shana Senensky, along the line, along with Eva Blumenstein from GWS, and I believe Director Steffelbein is also in attendance virtually, if you have additional questions. Thank you. And with that, I will hand over to any questions you have. Commissioner, do you have any questions for Stel? Maybe a quick recommendation. Your recommendation three is all encompassing. You might want to at least recognize this soon to be formed East Maui water or something just to just to make sure that we're aware of what's going on because that probably includes three or four of these annual meetings yes absolutely and that was something that was discussed during public testimony and in conversations with the county oh sorry a question on recommendation five which focused on working with Maui Dws to support development of their water conservation programs and given my Dws is like one of several providers, you know how to say when you say island water conservation yes absolutely so the water audits themselves include more than just the pws systems but um i think that's some good feedback that itself is only referring to non-pws so if that's something you want to amend yeah we can definitely do that okay i will say that the the water audits, especially in the area are being used as part of our assessment of the water use from an application. So we're trying to understand where the efficiencies can be made, not just in the public, but in the private systems as well. yeah so i mean yeah i was going to have to propose it a bit just change it from there to island yes katie the submittal is really clear that this fulfills a statutory obligation that we have to have a plan uh how does this strengthen our water management these will be the county alone that's a good question so these plans themselves obviously as you know are often imperfect it takes many years to write them so they're never going to be perfect when you present them to the commission that's why we try to approach them as living documents where they can be refined and updated as needed. I'd probably refer to the county and the implementation plan for specifics on how this will be used to move Maui County forward in terms of their water development and water resource protection initiatives, but that's also part of the exhibit that you see here. I think one of the important points to keep in mind is that this plan was developed in accordance with the old Hawaii water plan framework from 2000 and we are in the process of updating that framework and so we hope to consider a lot of other issues cultural issues that aren't specifically maybe brought out or explicit in the existing plans that you see coming before you, but it's something that we want to incorporate into future updates. A huge component that is often missing. Thank you, and I'll wait to hear more from Maui, Maui officials. so please okay oh go ahead item one is there a due date for that summary so it's in process now but i can let you the comment more specifically on where they're at but i believe it's in process and they should have it done within the next six to nine months thank you my question my only My question is, what is the impact if we don't approve this plan? Your question was already being used by the county for a lot of their capital projects and planning efforts. So we do not approve it. I believe there's so many ways in some way um to guide their process and what and what they want to achieve with a lot of resource protection on the island um again deferred probably to the county to provide more specific information about how not approving this plan when it would impact them i know that they've worked very hard many years to get to this point um i know that it's been a long process and not all studies have been satisfied um unfortunately i think that's just how it goes sometimes when you do outreach over many many years um but yeah i think the county might be able to comment a bit more about what impacts specifically not adopting the plan will happen okay um if there are no other questions i'm going to invite the county to provide us comments council member shane senasi would you like to um speak first aloha and aloha uh chair chang aloha happy to be here in support of the commission's recommendations uh we are supportive of the commission creating a summary of the report and also we support having regular updates made to the plan, including the Board of Water Supply and the Council's input. This will be important for community outreach and and just general awareness. We've heard loud and clear from the community that they want to see up to date data within the plan, And I'm supportive of having the Department of Water Supply update those numbers over time. So again, we just wanted to express our mahalo. And for your consideration of this plan, as Katie said, it has been a monumental task over the last couple of years. And many stakeholders were involved in the process. And so, and again, mahalo for coming to our communities and hearing their concerns. Thank you. Council members, commissioners, do you have any questions for Shane? Shane, I just had a clarification. In what you, your comments this morning was that the commission will provide a summary, is that that's the Maui. It's not, you're not looking at the water commission staff to do the summary, right? Yeah, we're correct. We were just supportive of the permissions recommendations. Okay, okay, very good, very good. Thank you. No other questions i have uh director john stuffelby maui county department of water supply hello virtually um again john stubblebean i've been the director since january so i'm i'm new here um and i understand that there were many concerns and opposing testimonies in adopting the plan. And I believe that the Commission deputy and his staff have worked diligently with with both the Department of Water Supply, County staff and community members to address these concerns. So you know i've read through the plan and I found that it reflects many of kind of the department goals and is guiding us in the right direction um and it it spells out strategies that both diversify our water supply work towards Solutions and work closer with other water purveyors there are several other water purveyors on on Maui and with other county agencies to consider all the resources and I want to just kind of briefly go through a few of the things that we're working on now that that kind of came out of the plan that are you know basically implementing the plan as we said earlier even though it hasn't been adopted we're using it you know it it's it's a very valuable plan in that it it just it utilized so much input from the community and other sources so um so first of all in terms of watershed protection uh we are uh increase we are we for years have been doing Grant funding to uh to fund non-profits to do watershed protection we're looking at increasing that in the future maybe that's that might even be the most important thing that we're doing to protect the source so that will continue we're also protecting our water from contamination we have a bill that's just been introduced to county council to establish wellhead protection in overlay districts so that there's less risk of well contamination you know in the area of the well heads we've got a lot going on in water conservation uh we uh we're retrofitting all of our meters with smart meters smart meters allow the meters to be read remotely which has a couple of advantages one is the meter reader doesn't have to physically go to the meter but the other advantage is it provides real-time information on water use and back in my I came from California my career back there, we did a study in one of the cities I was in, and the smart meters decreased water use 15%. We did a pilot study because people can get real information on how much water they're using. And it also detects leaks. So if like, if the meter's running 24 hours nonstop, you get a note, hey, you may have a leak leak so it really helps with water conservation we're also um have a landscape incentives and guidelines as well as requirements and we're working on a water conservation bill to introduce to the to the county council and our water board that will it will beef up our water conservation requirements and a big one is our tiered structure as as the other islands do we have a tiered structure. And council has just approved a revision to our tier structure where we increase the upper tier a lot. And so basically, you know, the the lifeline water rate didn't change much, but the top tier we increased 24 percent. So that's that's found to be maybe one of the most important things you can do you know money talks right so to you know to to uh to encourage people to to uh to reduce water use especially those that are using a lot we also implemented the council will be has approved a new rate for hotels and resorts that's a higher rate so that they pay more for the water and we do have some gray water initiatives going as well we've got one going in a lot of our parks and getting ready to put in another one so we see those as templates that can help increase gray water use throughout the county we also have some strategies that deal with climate change we're supporting the collaborative hydrological efforts studies of impacts of climate change and future well development on groundwater health and we have an ongoing study with usgs to to assess the effects of scenario-based recharge change on groundwater in the maui aquifers as demand increases and we're adding stream gauges and monitoring wells and other tools to assess what's happening with climate change in terms of source we are for our central system you probably know Maui has 12 separate water system which is so interesting for something from been fairly new here on our central system we're exploring new basal well development in the southern portion of the why he why he have aquifer and East East Maui well development as well and we're currently conducting a feasibility study to be followed by USGS assessment on the interaction between the groundwater and surface water and potential impacts from pumping the Haiku Aquifer for upcountry we're exploring new well development in the Makawa Aquifer and the Haiku to meet demand on the upcountry meter priority list. And we're assessing the new raw water reservoirs to increase reliable supply with consideration adopted to the in-stream flow standards. We're also considering alternative structures and processes to expedite the issuing of meters. And that's a whole nother meeting. We'll get into the meter list but we're looking at about four or five different strategies to help us to help us address that meter list in a more efficient way and on the west side over in Lahaina Kapalua area um we're pursuing new Wells and also working with Maui Land and Pine and Hawaii water services to integrate look at how we can integrate our systems better to most efficiently utilize the water in the area and then finally to address drought and system resiliency we're formalizing the demand response plans and mutual agreements with the private water purveyors to address water shortages uh they it was a set earlier when we can declare a water shortage but it's really helpful if all the other water companies on the island also declare a water shortage so we're looking we see that as really important element we're developing Wells to improve reliability and as it can as a contingency in areas that are dependent on surface water because walls are you know tend not to respond as quickly to obviously to rainfall events and And then we're looking to three of our main water supplies and three of our main areas are the ditch systems. And so we'll continue relying on those. So we're exploring how we invest in those systems to make sure that they're adequately maintained. And we're assessing the Wailuku water company system and potentially other legacy systems as well. So in summary, the plan serves us as a long-term guy that's the value of it it provides us a framework in which to to plan our efforts and I believe it's a good foundation that we can update obviously that's mentioned many times we need to update this regularly and and we'll work with the community and Commission staff to do that in each sector and we're also just as a reminder we're tackling the Mokai water use and development plan and we also have funding for the lanai plan coming up this fiscal year so Mahalo for your attention thank you thank you very much director any questions yes yes director uh congratulations on your your new post we welcome you to this role of public service and we thank you for your testimony particularly grateful that the county is uh taking upon itself to kind of invest in watershed protection and in those uh transmission systems those ancient transmission systems, which are really undermining the prudent use of a very valuable resource. My question is, you've got different bodies there. You've got the administration's water management team, you've got boards, and then you've got a new board that's coming up on the scene. Will the plan help in giving them one page to work off of and kind of get everybody on the same page? And you might have a different role in that, but we're all working for the same set of objectives. Is this plan kind of a navigational star in that sense? That's an excellent point. Yeah, there are many players involved in the water world and really partnerships are essential to making progress in water. And again, to making sure that everyone's kind of heading true north together. And so yes, absolutely, this plan will help guide all of us to make sure we're all headed the same direction and making progress towards a better future. That's a really good point, thank you. Thanks, thank you. Any other question, Mike question mike yeah a comment uh again congratulations on your new post and i i echo uh uh commissioner hannah's comments uh maui county was the first county that established a watershed partnership and the first county that actually so i i definitely encourage that just for for the occurs briefly, you came from California. You guys don't lack for water issues. What's it like coming to Hawaii? Is there things that you brought can help or are we out in front or are we way behind? I wouldn't say you're in front or behind. It's different for sure. I mean, there are certainly some, you know, many of the kind of skills and knowledge I developed in California that are very helpful here. There are a many of the skills and knowledge I developed in California that are very helpful here. There are a lot of similarities, but for sure, there are unique situations on the islands and on Maui especially, which I'm having a fascinating time learning because I've never seen that one before. I've certainly had many of those moments. So I bring in 40 plus years of water experience in California and Arizona, and actually in Missouri as well, but that isn't quite as relevant because I have lots of water there. So certainly it helps. And there's certain basic principles that I bring with me. For example, the value partnerships, which we just talked about. In Californiaia there's 400 water and wastewater agencies you know i have to work together and you know not to mention the state and the federal and cities and counties and so on um and then also kind of the the need to have and i'll just say one more thing the need to have what we call a diversified water portfolio where um you know you need to have multiple sources of water and have a resilient redundant system. And so we're working on that both in terms of the sources and then also in terms of the transmission and delivery systems to make sure they're robust and redundant and can handle the things that always happen to disrupt the system. So thank you very much. Any other questions? I have one, John, So thank you very much. Any other questions? I have one. John, this plan, undoubtedly there were challenges with communities. So, but it seems like, you know, Councilmember Sinansi did a lot of good work in reaching out, did the rest of the commission how are you proposing to engage continue to engage the community in this ongoing dialogue on water well sure i mean very actively and and and uh you know and you know ava ava leads that effort and i think a lot of good work has been done and and shane has been also great in this for my understanding uh you know I believe there's a certainly the we need to engage with the community in many ways robustly often and listen to the community you know we can't always do exactly what the community wants you know sometimes you have to say well that's not exactly what we can do but but absolutely we need to listen and so you know it's it's I I go out in the community I've been hundreds and hundreds of community meetings in my career and uh uh you know we had just one uh we had a couple up in recently up country and it was extremely it was 300 people at the uh community center and you know listening to their concerns they bring a lot of valuable information which we need to hear and we need to understand it and we need to uh consider that as we make our decisions so i'm a strong advocate of community participation and we'll continue to do that very actively be involved with that and then you know ava will help me with how that's done here in hawaii which is um there's a lot to it here for sure i'm encouraged by your comments thank you very much any other comments yes please thank you chair hi john thank you for the presentation um the action list that you just described how and when would that be embedded in the water use plan that's before us today i think it's in there i mean almost everything i believe everything i said has a direct link to the plan so So I didn't quote the sections, but essentially everything that we're doing has a link back to the plan. So is there a quantitative measure of what your targets are for reuse and reduction that's part of the plan? And as it's tied into your general development plan for Mauui as well as community development plans because at some point you know these uses will come before us for us to approve and i guess it'll be helpful if we had some assurances that that the allocations are based on action plans that you just described right yeah that is the case I'll probably I think I will defer to Ava for that in terms of the the quantitative connection to the plan because she's much more familiar with it than I am having worked on it for for many years so Ava I'll let you uh let you tackle that one if you don't yeah go ahead eva go ahead mahalo chair um yeah in response to uh the commission's question yes there are quantified targets for um each strategy in fact that relates to resource use so in terms of recycled water you have the uh demand and supply projected through year 2035 so in terms of recycled water you have the demand and supply projected through year 2035 so in terms of targeting uh build out of r1 or other recycled water use or whether it's groundwater development or conservation targets you have those quantified you know in five-year increments um and then the strategies kind of have the uh short to long-term implementation range some of these projects will be you know further scoped out over a very long time, and some of them, like Director mentioned, are already in the works. So, yeah, so there are targets in there that we are working through tracking in the implementation matrix so we can report progress to our board and council and to you folks. And I'll only add to that that i will not hesitate to exceed the targets um does that also those targets apply to the other purveyors other than the board of water supply or these action items basically you control all of those hundred percent as we go into the different regions how are those are going to be managed and whose auspices that's a really good question um i mean this is one of the uh challenges right with having the county developing a water use development plan that applies to private water purveyors and other users. So in terms of the county agencies investing in recycled water expansion, stormwater use, et cetera, no, the plan does that. So it's, you know, that this is also the driver or the guidance for capital improvement program and budget priorities for other agencies that you know recycle water falls on the department of environmental management Etc for private purveyors you know there's a lot of incentives in the plans and there are other there are tools that on the county level can be we can implement strategies through land use controls or land use approvals so if this is saying a new development um the strategy in the water strengthen plan is to use x resource and that project comes in for um land use approvals then we ask the planning commission to to look at that as a guidance and we put those comments in already in discretionary permit review but yeah we don't obviously we don't have the authority to impose conservation or allocations on the private providers that's no, I think that's a good model to be actively commenting on land use issues. Thank you. You have a comment. Thanks. You go. I think one thing that I'm excited to hear what director shuffleburn said you know I mean one thing it sounds like molly dws can do is sort of set the pace and set an example with say smart metering and kind of setting new standards for monitoring usage and conservation um i know it's not in the um plan but it would be exciting to see you know as you guys get more data and more real-time data to be able to have dashboards or something um and and it doesn't need to be put in the plan but just to have that in mind is where things where you folks maybe can take it i think maui is really setting has opportunity to set new models for the rest of the islands given the whole array of challenges and opportunities so yeah thanks for articulating that i guess and and helping us kind of listen and see where some of those gaps are too, you know, because if you guys set an example, then maybe it allows us as a commission to then point out to the other private purveyors like, hey, look, it's doable. in terms of conservation and kind of innovating so kind of appreciate the work that's been put in to taking that feedback and and be more responsive great comment thank you any other questions david did you want to did you want to add anything more um to the discussion because uh well thank you chair um well i just want to really say we really appreciate that both the commission staff and the deputy that they you know they're taking the time to scrutinize the plan and um to further engage with the community members you know after this went through council here on our end so um yeah i just want to assure assure you, every voice that came forward was heard and considered to craft these strategies. And we think that the proposed conditions and the steps in the middle, we can do that, that can be implemented and that would allow the plan to go forward. Oh, I wanna respond also to Commissioner Hanna's question or was it Sher's question on what happens if the plan is not approved. as director stuff will be you know, a couple of examples of how we already lean on the plan we're using it as a guidance for capital improvement programs and budget priorities. Anna Dreber, Planner Item No.1 for 2020. You know, it was adopted by ordinance, but of course the plan has a dual function is to be a guidance document for the Commission as well. So. So I think that is, you know, for us, if it was not approved. The next update will go through the whole process again with community engagement, going to our board public hearings. New comes review and approval. But if it's not approved by the Commission, of course, it's not incorporated into Hawaii water plan. So you you don't have the tool you know to serve that that purpose. I think that would be the real downside you know there's a lot of valuable guidance in there, we believe, for the for the Commission as well. So yes, I mean we feel this is already we're gonna continue scoping out projects, strategies, and the plan. So they'd be even more opportunity for projects, strategies and the plan. So maybe even more opportunity for community participation there over the time. So even revisiting demand and supply as we're scoping out this project. So it's a living document and just wanna all everyone that put so much effort into the process. So I do have a quick question on the living nature of the document right now it's a PDF posted to the county website and as it gets updated I noticed some sections had the draft watermark does that mean the document itself will be versioned or is it going to be I want to understand how the public is going to access the living document as it gets updated. Just the technical details. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So the the Pdf document that now has the links to come from table of content. We have the the draft water of you know summary of the implement of the strategies, and you know a tracking sheet. So we will have that available to the public as well. So that's something that gets shared with our land use planning departments. Our board council is needed, so we can kind of just track and see how that evolves over time. Then in further updates of the plan i'm pretty sure we're not going to tackle the island as a whole again. It could be by office sector or by you know watershed or or or whatnot. So that's way it's a little more manageable I mean it's it's still you know a year-long process but uh so i see that as the updates are done you know it would be focused on on a particular aquifer sector um and same thing just posted you know for public review as we go through that process i have a simple suggestion actually i started doing it you can create a navigation pane in pdf so i'll send you a version because it allows you to navigate from page 1300 back to the TOC back to you know, jump around section. So I think that would ease access and review and feedback and maybe ameliorate any kind of frustrations. Thank you. Thank you. That was very helpful. Yes, sir. Quick question. What's the status of the Molokai and Lanai water use development plans Mahalo commissioner we have the consultant townscape halfway through a little more than halfway through updating the Molokai what are you saying development plan a lot of the community engagement is completed uh demand projections are done and we're now betting resource options or presenting resource options to the community so they have still ways to go uh we put in we have funding approved for this next fiscal year fy24 to um commission a consultant to help us update the lanai what you stone plan so you know it's a multi-year process but thinking you, you know, we'll contract towards the end of this year to begin that process. So what, where do you view the horizon for these plans? That you'll have something that to present? So for Molokai, I'd say earliest March, 2024, to be a draft plan to be presented to our board. We will brief the commission at the same time. The board has 180 days to review and provide their comments before we present a bill for an ordinance to our county council um this maui plan took three years through county council so i'm not guaranteeing you know as soon as that's better and adopted then it'd be presented to uh through commission and for lanai i would say you know a minimum three years as well and i will also mention that the monokai plan plan will be it'll be a free theme i think it's next month or the following month by the consultants to the commission so we're already going to organize that great that's great super thank you they're just there's going to be a bunch of planning components of the whole parts of the uh water plant coming to the commission um we have a couple that the board wants to present on as well um we're trying not to have more than one per meeting because it's so thick and it's robust and it is a planning document um so just trying to manage the agendas but they're coming you will you will see a bunch of these planning documents coming before the spot very good any other questions? This is a rather large document. Is it nimble enough? Could you say it's a living document? But I'm assuming you also utilize the adaptiveble enough that as you get information you can make appropriate whether it's changes or updates and how does that work out as a practical matter thank you chair appreciate that and uh i think we're still figuring out you know for for the different kind of strategies how we apply them but, I mean, we use it frequently because I mean, this is since it was adopted by council, it kind of gives us the justification to whether it's investing in water resource protection or wellhead protection or funding projects. So as a tool, it is useful. We have the implementation matrix to refer to. But in terms of updating data, for example, we have looking at feasibility studies to assess resources in different aquifer systems right now. And part of that process, we have consultant vet or revisit the demand and supply projections to see are they still valid. You know, they were done five years old and whatnot. And you know, it turns out they're fairly valid, but for central system, for example, we had projected, we need another 8 million gallons a day by year 2035. Turns out we need 11 MGD by year 2040. So it's a living document and that is constantly, you know. We we track private purveyors. What do you use those that report? We track our own warriors, obviously, and kind of adjust those projections as we go, and as projects are scoped out. No, thank you. That's very helpful. I mean I think it is helpful to have a document that can be sort of the central location of current information, you know, a framework for planning, but it is helpful to have the document that is, you know, constantly updated and reflects real time but it is something a document that it's not it can be a guiding document for more than just government or the county but others as well so that's good okay thank you very much any other questions i've also thank you eva and thank you john for your testimony your comments um i also have on is it um gina young is gina on not there is don lono nope anybody else then kathy on the lot on zoom those are my committee staff members okay all right thank you thank you um is there anyone else in on zoom that would like to participate or provide us a comment on item b1 okay seeing no hands being raised, move to approve item B. One. Okay, I have a motion to approve. I do have a second. I'll second. Okay, very good. I have 2 seconds and a motion and 2 seconds. All in favor say, I I any opposed motion has been unanimously approved congratulations county of maui thank you very much thank you all right thank you again so now we will move on to item b2 and item b2 is approval of stream channel alteration permit application SCAP 5954-6 and special conditions. Do we have a staff presentation? Okay, oh, Dean, go ahead, Dean. Good morning, commissioners. Dean Nguyen over the commission stream protection and management branch presenting on item B2. This is, as Chair mentioned, we're requesting approval of a stream channel alteration permit SCAP.5954.6 by the County of Maui Department of Public Works. The project proposes to restore a section of an embankment covering an area of approximately 5,000 square feet along the Wailuku River for flood protection purposes in the Millyard Light Industrial Subdivision at Wili Palupe, Wailuku, Maui. Commission staff stands by the submittal, and if I may, I'm just going to read through the recommendations. So the recommendation one, that the Commission approve the stream channel alteration permit subject to the standard conditions in Exhibit 4 and the special conditions below. Condition 1A, in conformance with the county of maui planning department's recommendations incorporated by reference in exhibit one the permittees shall certify to the maui planning department that no increase in base flood water surface water excuse me base flood water surface elevation will occur item 1a in conformance with the Division of Forestry and Wildlife Recommendations incorporated by reference in exhibit two, the permittees shall avoid construction and operational impacts of state listed species, minimize the movement of plant or soil material between work sites as they may contain detrimental fungal pathogens such as rapid ohia death, vertebrate and invertebrate pests such as koki frogs and little fire ants, or invasive plant parts such as miconia, maling, which could harm our native species and ecosystems. And lastly, consult with the Maui Invasive Species Committee to help plan, design, and construct the project, learn of any high-risk invasive species in the area and ways to mitigate their spread. Item 1C, in accordance with the proposal by the Maui Department of Public Works, acknowledging the sensitivity of the project location, the permittee shall implement the following best management practices. Limiting repair activities to one half of the stream cross section at a time, limiting construction work to what can be installed and stabilized by the half of the stream cross section at a time, limiting construction work to what can be installed and stabilized by the end of the working day for areas within the ordinary high watermark, use of a plastic lined sandbag cofferdam around the stream work area, use of silt fence above the ordinary high watermark around the construction access operating area and staging and stockpile areas, use of dust fences around the staging and stockpile area, and lastly sediment filtering and treatment for dewatering discharge. Item 1D, issuance of the permit is subject to SHPDE concurrence. If SHPDE requires conditions, delegate to the deputy director to attach those as conditions. Item 1E, the permittee shall ensure streamflow connectivity around the project site at all times with no more than 50% of the stream channel with being diverted around the project area to enable fish passage. And lastly, Adam one F to ensure coordination to the project permitting to start any issues that may arise during the project work and when the project is scheduled to be completed and that concludes staff's presentation i believe we do have um consult the consultants for the project on the call hi good morning thank you dean thank you commissioners and and Chair. My name is Gwendolyn Rivera. I'm with Munukio Hiraga. We're the consultants for the County of Maui on this project. Also on the call, we have Christy Ono from the, Susumi and Associates, the engineers. We have Adrian Wong and Rick Evans to address any questions you may have. All right, thank you. Commissioners, do you have any questions either for staff or for the engineers. I was just in reviewing the fish and wildlife comments about kind of the hardening of the stream bank. I just was wondering if you could explain or recap your response on how this wouldn't um i guess i'm particularly concerned about potential for downstream scour right below and is that an issue and why it's not and how how the design of the structures addresses that so i'm not sure who the best person to respond with the PE. Yeah, I guess I can take that. I'm with Austin Tsutsumi, the civil engineer in this project. We, you know, it's not going to speed up the flow beyond this bank. It's going to just in the area where it interacts with the hardening, it'll accelerate in that area. But then we used a roughened grouted riprap edge so that it mitigates the velocity increase there. And we don't expect any increase in velocity downstream and we did a hydraulic analysis throughout the area from upstream of the project through to downstream to verify those hydraulic conditions I think just yeah it just helps to know that how you guys have thought about it and considered. So thank you. Any other questions or comments? Yes. Just a quick question. The 600 cubic yards that will be excavated to meet the forestry requests of minimizing the movement of soil how would that be reused or recycled would it be on site the 600 uh cubic yards excavation that's listed. Yeah, so what's happened with the stream bank is it's eroded into a near, you know, it used to be at a sloping in bank bed and now it's eroded to a near vertical condition and replacement without doing a vertical wall, which we wanted to avoid doing a wall is we we sloped it at the maximum possible um gradient that we could and that is what's requiring it bringing in a fill um to sort of replace what what been lost from past erosion? Does that answer your question? So, no, all the material that's being excavated, Forestry is concerned about vectoring pathogens. So would that material be reused in sort of reconstruction of the embankment, or are you going to store it on site? Or what's the – how are you going to handle that? That is a – I would expect that the material wouldn't be removed from the site, that it would be, whatever is excavated, would be reused on site. So I don't, I'm not sure what the, how to better answer that. Gwen, would you have anything to add on that one? It's more of a biological kind of question. In terms of the placement of the excavated material? Yes. Perhaps I could- I guess, is it leaving the site? um this is christy ono at the county of maui department of public works given the concern i'm sure within the area we could find a use for that material and it does not need to leave the site it's not a lot it's only 600 yards so the plan is that you will reuse it somewhere in backfilling in that area to address forestry's concern yes if it's not appropriate material to reuse specifically for this project i'm sure within the area of the Waialuku River we can find a use for it as there are you know maintenance practices done nearby that could likely use material okay good thank you any other questions or comments? Do I have any of those are the only people on the list. Do I have any other Kathy anybody else in the zoom that is here to provide comments on item B to Okay. Hearing no other comments. Do I have a motion on this matter so moved to approve motion has been moved and seconded a motion has been moved and seconded to approve item b2 the approval of the stream channel alteration permit all in favor please say aye any opposed right. Thank you very much. The commission has approved item B two. So let's, you know, I'm going to take a five minute break. And then we will come back to do item B three. Thank you. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Thank you very much. We are going to go to item B2. What? B3 B3 B3 B3 approved stream channel alteration permit scat 5974.3 by castling cook homes hawaii staff hello and good morning again commissioners good morning item b3 this is dean bueno again with the stream protection management branch uh presenting item b3 and this is requesting approval of the stream channel all three permits scat 5974.3 by castling cook homes hawaii incorporated the project proposes to convey and discharge on-site stormwater runoff into kipapa stream that has been consolidated and treated in the coral ridge stormwater treatment facilities the proposed drain line 2 or dl2 is designed to accommodate the peak runoff from the second phase which is the northern portion of the core ridge development a drain line will be approximately 1600 feet in length and will consist of two box culverts that discharge into a 12 foot wide trapezoidal channel with articulated concrete blocks that terminates in a riprap channel lining and concrete rubble masonry stream bank protection at kipapa stream a 10 foot by 8 foot box hovered would be constructed in row G to connect to the upstream portion of drain line two. And staff stands by its submittal. And if I may just read the recommendation that the commission approve the stream channel alteration permit application that proposed to convey and discharge onsite stormwater runoff into Kipapa stream that has been consolidated and treated in the Coal Ridge Stormwater Treatment Facilities subject to the standard conditions in Exhibit 3 and the special condition below which is approval of subject of approval excuse me approval is subject to SHPDE concurrence SHPDE requires conditions authority shall be delegated to the Deputy Director to attach those as a condition of the stream channel alteration permit and that concludes staff's recommendations thank you commission do you have any questions for dean dean i would tell i have this a little i have to be careful um concerns regarding the shpt do they ultimately send you a letter of concurrence? Yes, it may take a little while. I was in communication with Susan Lebo on this one and she did, they were trying to push through this thing. They did admit, admittedly that they were a little behind. Okay, very good. thank you so much newt what's the risk of this stormwater runoff containing chemicals uh petroleum in particular from roadway systems or from which they're gathered and depositing that into our streams um i would actually i'll probably refer to the consultant who was on the call. But my understanding of the stormwater retention facilities is that they will. They are intending to construct detention basins upstream to settle out any any particular matter and all that particular, but not necessarily, you know chemical uh that's right and maybe um the consulting can speak to that in more detail thank you is that mr russell arakaki are you the consultant yes i am okay yes um good morning chair members of the commission my name is russell arakaki, Members of the Commission, my name is Russell our khaki I work for park engineering and i'm the principal design engineer for the core rich off site drain line number two. Russell Arakaki, To answer the question about chemicals. Russell Arakaki, The core rich project is designing stormwater bestoff in the ground where appropriate. There's also filtration systems. It could be either vegetated filtration or these manufactured treatment devices. So that's all designed or will be designed as part of the core rich drainage system cities reviewing it they have been reviewing and approving construction plans for the roadways and subdivisions thank you mr karki so in your professional view it'll be effective in mitigating any of those concerns yes it should be thank you that's that's the best technology that's available now um yeah i have a question with this stream protection for maybe Dean. What's the sort of ecological status of Kīpapa stream? Kīpapa stream is a fairly, so it's a tributary to Waikele stream, which is a pretty urbanized stream. Ecologically, let me see, I don't have it on hand. But it's pretty filled with invasive species, especially in the lower reaches. If I recall, Kurt, I'm trying to pull up the... Sorry, if you give me a minute. I'm trying to pull up the, there was also a biological stream assessment that was completed by ECOS as part of the, what's it called, environmental impact statement. And they basically found that there'll be no impacts to the biological resources on the stream. Right. Yeah, yeah. It would just be nice to sort of have a little bit more detail around it to demonstrate that. So okay. I mean, I don't know the stream, so it would help to understand because, I mean, a big construction project will have short-term and long-term applications for this if i can kind of just add on dean and maybe kaleo what i am finding is that um we don't we don't have really good baseline data on a lot of our streams so um you know it's very difficult world and Mr. Arakaki, I don't question your comments. However, I think scientific data is going to be really helpful to us in the long run. I am, I believe if we had good streamgages, is there a possibility that we could ask or maybe I should ask you Mr. Arakaki, given given the project that you're doing, are you guys willing to put in a stream gauge in Kipapa to at least give us some good data to monitor the impacts? We hope you are absolutely correct. No impacts by this activity in the stream, but anecdotal is nice, but having some scientific measure. So we have a really hard time, the state putting on stream gauges, but is that a possibility that you could do that? Oh, Aaron, what do you think? Do you want him to answer? Only if he's gonna say yes, he can do it. You're open to it. Well, go ahead, Aaron. Introduce yourself. Aaron Strach, Stream Protection Management Branch. Wykelly Stream is monitored. It's one of the long-term monitoring stations across the state, but it's also heavily regulated. There are other upstream diversions. When you say monitored, Kew Papa Stream has been monitored in terms of flow, but you're interested in more of the ecological- Yes, yes, yes. Which US Streamgate is not gonna help you with. Okay, so what will help us with that? Encouraging DAR or the legislature to fund a street program in the division of aquatic resources sure yeah ask a question yes hi mr arakaki once the storm water is collected and passed through whatever filtration or processing that you're planning is that covered by npds yes it is it will be it'll be under the city and county's uh npds permit so isn't there a requirement to measure water quality in the discharge? I'm not sure if measurement and analysis of stormwater is in their NPDES program. I would have to get back to you. So the city and county monitors across the island to ensure compliance with NPDES but you know they're not monitoring daily they're monitoring but is it the permit issued to a system a person uh the it's the accumulation of every point i've done so it's so like for every in the lakeless for example every storm drain outfall there's a permit for the cumulative impact of that but isn't one of the requirements looking at analysis of what is in that discharge not on a specific basis no and not and this is a doh issue that doesn't fall under us but um they they don't monitor specifically any individual outfall should they be that that would be a monitoring burden that would bankrupt the island can you ask a question then of our yes commissioner i mean how does doh um just for our understanding how is doh kind of considering the npds setting as a project like this this project or a project like this so i've been out of the clean water branch which manages the npds program for over 10 years okay so from what i recall the municipal separate storm sewer system the ms4 permit requires the permittee the city and county to to pre to impose bmps on on themselves as well as like those construction projects where you see the bmps in front of the catch basin inlets um things like that and then as Mr. Akaki was saying the constructed filtration systems the actual monitoring of the discharge into state waters I don't recall the frequency of that monitoring but you need to understand that runoff into the storm drains is going to be varying on a daily basis because you don't know if somebody had a breakdown on the road and caused the oil spill that might have happened there. So there's monitoring that is done, but I don't know how we can tie it into this point it's going through a very specific system yes with a outfall yes that is very specific so it's being engineered to certain standards and i guessrakaki, what are those standards? I mean, you must be anticipating some kind of input in terms of water quality. So as you're going through the process of treating the water, are you just looking at solids or are you looking at other things uh no it's it's solids such as uh sediment right soluble solid right trash debris but i think the bmps uh that meet the city and County rules also look at the removal of other chemical constituents. So one example is vegetated swale or just a grass swale where you're allowing the runoff to flow through removing whatever contaminants that are in there. Okay. Aaron, can I kind of follow up with you? I am, you know, DLNR, we not only look at, I mean, we do a lot of, DAR has a lot of fishing activities, right? We get a lot of, DAR has a lot of fishing activities, right? We get a lot of concerns raised by fishermen that they get criticized for impacts to the near-shore waters by their fishing activity. We regulate the fishing, but they're saying it's a lot of it is the mauka activities. So when a permittee comes before us, like on a project like this, what mechanisms do we have to try to utilize this process to, because you said, oh, Dara could go to the legislature and develop a stream program. But what and I want to be very reasonable to the applicants. I mean, I'm not going to hold them responsible. But what is it that is there anything that we can do in our process to help more equitably distribute or at least monitor impacts of different activities that may have an effect on the streams that eventually flow down to the near-shore waters. So I think there are two not unrelated issues, but one is the ecosystem, the biota and monitoring the biota. The other is water quality and the impacts on the ecosystem, both in the stream and in the near shore. And best management practices, which they're very well articulated, that control, say, sediment and nutrients in runoff would benefit both the industry and the shore. But as a take a step back, look at the entire watershed managing. Impervious services, managing invasive species in the forest, managing repairing zones, which we as a whole don't do a great job of. There are definitely specific instances where the state is doing an excellent job managing the forest, but we have lots of forest that doesn't fall under the sea. And so whether it's on private land, whether it's on city and county, federal coordinating management activities to reduce runoff, to increase native vegetation, to improve the health of our ecosystems, both within the stream and in the near shore, would benefit a host of values, fisheries, cultural practices, whatever. And both from a water quality perspective and a ecosystem perspective. So what can Seabourn do? i think we're restricted we do our best no you're you're absolutely but i'm looking more at like um and and bear with me mr arakaki you're not you know i mean i'm not just looking at targeting you but i mean applicants come before us and they're proposing activities we have conditions um and people can do BMPs and they can. But unless we have good data to monitor, we now have to have baseline as to, OK, at this point in time, this is the condition of the stream or the water quality or the ecosystem. However, over time, we've noticed based upon new information the stream or the water quality or the ecosystem. However, over time, we've noticed based upon new information or some measurements, the changes. Now that may be due far beyond just this particular project, but I think, sharing the opportunity of participation by our community members, including our developers, to help the state better manage our resources. And I'm just kind of struggling, but I think Kaleo, as a matter of policy, and I'm not going to just pick up mr arakaki but i think we need to kind of think about that you know as conditions um what what is it that we can ask the applicant that comes before us and it might be contributing to a fund so that we can work with dar on doing you know better better management um but i i just think that the opportunity presents itself when we're going through an application on a known activity that could have an impact on water quality, ecosystem. And I'm just, you know, how do we as citizens of this state collectively try to do better so you just just totally get it and we've talked about these issues um what is before us and i think what kind of limits us in certain situations and this is maybe square statutory amendments or other types of rules are required is the SCAP is a construction permit. It's a two-year permit specific to that. And so a lot of the conditions that are recommended are tied to that period of time. What you're talking about is like pre, during, and post kind of monitoring and compliance. And so tying in other conditions that go beyond that two-year period, we have to have a conversation about how to make that happen, right? And what are the tools available to us? But understanding these individual projects are all part of this larger ecosystem, this larger abukua'a, namoku that we work within, and we all have impacts, whether positive or negative, on those resources. So I'm totally open to strategize and look at opportunities. And I hear you basically. Okay, I do want you guys to think about it because I mean, I want to be equitable. I you know, this project has a very limited like life and potential impact. But if we keep on kicking the can down the road, I mean, we'll never. Yeah, exactly. So but I don't know how to differentiate that. I have a thought and a suggestion as an educator, and also just watching the color of Manoa stream change over the last week. Very quickly with rain and no rain. Would it be with this applicant be willing to, and I've seen people do this with the Kelly cam, like ecologists put a camera on a plant so that you can just watch it as it flowers. You know, would the applicant be willing to maybe work with a local school, because that's Mili Lani, right, right nearby. You know, I mean, potentially work for educational and outreach purposes, put a camera above the project site and below and just let people kind of watch the stream. It's not, I mean it is a form of data, but it's not. Maybe there's a better idea, but I just wanted to put it out there as a way for people to engage with their streams because I'm currently working on urban ecology. On Maui, we have people who are organized, who are constantly watching the stream, who are in the stream. We don't really have that on Oahu. And so we forget that the stream exists and don't care about it, don't weed it, don't cash into it and on all kinds. So I think, you know, would people be willing to entertain that as an idea for the duration of the project. I mean, I think that's an excellent. I think for me, it's it's the community needs to feel a sense of ownership to these resources if they don't see it. They don't know about it and who best but kids. But it does make a difference. And I think I'm just trying to find different opportunities and venues and platforms where one we're not only engaging and educating but we're also getting good data for us to make better informed decisions because that's that is my you know there's so much unknown i mean i don't even know what questions to ask but i think when when a project comes before us um i don't know what you know sort of that shared responsibility so i don't know mr arakaki you i i think this is like i would have came in here for this what is all this about but i mean i think i hoping you're hearing i obviously we've got a lot you know more to think about with the within the department, but I think you kind of hear some of our sentiments I don't know if you have any thoughts or comments. I just want to add that. I did mention. we're following the city's rules. Part of that rule allows the use of manufactured treatment devices so these are prefabricated units they also remove nutrients heavy metals other hydrocarbons other contaminants so that's also being designed with this training system. And that I think is significant. One to do a comparison between someone who's using sort of this less intrusive material versus others who are doing traditional construction. Is there a difference on the impacts to our ecosystem? I don't know. All I'm suggesting is if there's a mechanism for us to utilize these applications and these projects as they become before us to sort of share in this inquiry maybe if i can real quick and maybe a recommendation is we can maybe tap saint connie as well as Department of Health and Clean Water Branch to maybe come in and use their NPS permit as a way to kind of share the BMPs, the technologies, the work that they have and are currently doing, and then maybe areas where they need more help or more data. And that's where maybe we could fill the gap on the policy side. Maybe that's a recommendation I can pose and we can bring them to the commission and see if they're willing to engage at that level. I just want to be constructive, but I also realized DLNR, we don't have enough resources to do what needs to be done, but we know things need to be done. So, okay. Thank you for letting me speak. Go ahead. Well, I appreciate your line of discussion and it gets to really having this body be more informed as to what those best practices are so that when different consultants or different applicants come before us, we can check their proposal against our knowledge. But right now, I think our knowledge may be fragmented across the spectrum of membership. And I'm wondering if there's some space or way we can have an informational briefing from the industry, from the regulatory bodies, as you have suggested, Kalel, from landowner developers in terms of what should we expect of modern developments these days? What is the highest standard for what we're creating that would really allow for the development of lands in ways that really are beneficial to the environment and not uh so I think there's a lot of change I mean uh in that industry and I'm they're uh tending to the impacts that they have and I think it's incumbent upon them to raise the standard to be uh to create a competitive Edge for themselves as consultants as as developers and so let's get a briefing and figure out what those where they are yeah and I'll just jump in and this this is actually really exciting because water quality is is going to be the next the focus in my opinion of this commission and the permanent health in the next couple of years um with new emerging contaminants and regulations but also just how do we holistically manage that and then as you mentioned the the real ripple effect it has the monkey connection on all of our resources all of our programs here at dnr it's real um and finding out how those are connected is going to be really really important very true and i guess i'm also just trying gonna be really, really important. Very true. And I guess I'm also just trying to be more equitable. I mean, we cannot hold the last developer responsible for all the paths, but how do we share some of that management responsibility, whether it's monitoring, whether it's BMPs, but I recognize that we do have to be more proactive. We are constantly reacting to a crisis. So how do we have good information to be more proactive and make an informed decision but also share proportionately with those that come before us to utilize our public resources and you know how do we get them to help share in that that opportunity to meet these challenges but um oh thank you for entertaining sort of my my little what i'm i am trying to use every opportunity to help supplement dlnr meet its goals and its missions but thank you very much and thank you mr arakaki is there do you have anybody else from your team that would like to speak or you know because i noticed you do have several from castle and cook that are here as well as from um your PAR Engineering uh there's one other person from engineering concepts also a design consultant um I don't think Castle and Cook is on the on the video okay okay well actually can you just because I didn't pull it out mentally from the submittal, just explain, you mentioned you're aligned with best management practices, and you gave more detail about, it's not just a sediment retention basin, but there are more filtration processes. Do you have any pictures? I mean, I think I saw a blueprint, but you know, kind of conceptual design so we can better understand, you know what, what you folks are doing and, and how it is, you know, it's, you're not just trying to do minimal compliance, you're actually trying to really clear the stormwater. Let's see if I can pull up a website. Someone older. And let's see if I can share my screen. Oh, I okay. I'm disabled from sharing this screen. Can we do that? Yeah, you should be able to share now. Got it. Can you see my screen now? Yes, Okay, this is one product that we are. Castleman Cook is installing stormwater goes in this chamber, and it gets filtered through these cartridges, which removes the sediment trash debris as well as heavy metals uh hydrocarbons so that this is just one product just gotta be sure you don't release the kraken yes so you've got to clean it a bit before it gets to that stage, right? That's right. So maintenance, removal of trash and debris. Let's see. This kind of shows stormwater going through the chamber. But there's also a trash and debris collection area here. These are the filters. And that goes out downstream to keep up with stream. Compared to what comes off the street. Yeah. What's the capacity of that? Cause like, you know, in larger flood events easily exceed that. Yeah, the capacity is nowhere near the peak flows that we're designing the off-site drainage system for um it's typically it's very small it's a smaller storm one inch one inch of rainfall. But then the swales too should also function as well. I guess I'm thinking most sediment transport happens in the small events and you're kind of maybe missing some of the most significant. Sediments shouldn't be released, whatever gets in here. The city's design criteria is not to treat the peak flow, you know, whether it's the 10 year or larger storms. Okay. So it sounds like a conversation with the city. Yeah. Russell, can I add to that? Okay, Doreen Young is on. Okay. I'm Doreen Young and I'm with Engineering I was engineering concepts sorry I was having problems with my camera but. Doreen Young, wanted to add that the reason why the city chose a one inch rainstorm is that's usually 80% of the frequency of the rainfall that occurs. Doreen Young, So that's the reason why the one inch storm is used. Makes perfect logic. Except 80% of the runoff. Probably 80% of the runoff happens 2% of the time, you know, so yeah, I mean, if the coral is getting blanketed, it's happening at the high end. So that sounds like a good conversation to have across the city. Yeah, I think it would be good to talk with city i mean even all the counties and how they're managing um stormwater we haven't engaged in stormwater but it is a a big a big issue that we have to talk about and falls within the context of the commission water resource management so um we will try to bring forward you know this thread of conversation to the commission it's something that we haven't really focused on but i do think it does have impacts on the commission's overall policy setting decision so all right russell when you designed the system, you must have looked at the effluent that you are planning to handle in the one inch events. Have you, what's the analysis of that water sample? We did not do any water quality analysis. Currently it's not a requirement but you're designing a system to do something correct correct but you don't know what you're gonna that something is that you gotta handle right that's right so yeah shouldn't you sort of know what you're going to handle even at the one inch events um I'm assuming there had historical one inch flows or some flows currently correct all of the testing of these systems that we're specifying are done by the manufacturer and they follow guidelines of let's say new jersey other jurisdictions so they need to meet the water quality treatment requirements that were established. This is all approved by EPA and then passed down to Department of Health and then on to the city and county as part of their NPDES program. So at this time there's no requirement to look at or measure the pollutants that enter the system and leave the treatment system. Okay, no, that's fine. Different conversation, but thank you. I know, Russell, I'm sure this is much more than you had thought he's like am i here for the wedding no we appreciate you your patience and you know answering our questions any more questions comments commission anybody else kathy in the audience. Okay. Commissioner, are you ready for the vote? Call for the vote. Move approval. Second. Okay, motion has been moved and seconded to approve staff's recommendation for item B3. All in favor, say aye. Any opposed? Motion has been unanimously approved. Thank you very much, Russell and your team thank you dean thank you thank you commissioners so now we're going to move on to i think is it item c one c1 ready good morning chair commissioners ryan im. I'm the program manager for the Groundwater Regulation Branch. Today I'm going to be presenting to you a briefing item C1. This will be a briefing on the Commission's data on wells related to the Redhill field tank crisis. So let me share my screen first. I think you can all see that now. So I'm going to give you a little bit of an overview of my presentation today should take about maybe 10 minutes or so and this is kind of a little bit of a spoiler for you so the items i'm gonna go over first of all are uh what are the commission's deep monitor well data and what does that tell us about the aquifers in question? Well, the punchline is the aquifers are robust and they're relatively healthy right now. Second item I'm gonna be going over is the well pumpage for the three wells on the Navy system. And the good news about that is the Navy wells are being pumped within the allocated amounts that the Commission has allocated to them and chlorides are stable. The final point I'm going to discuss is the NAVY monitor wells that have been both drilled so far and what is being proposed. So my next slide is showing you the aquifer system areas on Oahu and our primary, can you see my cursor? Our primary area of concern, generally Waipahu, Waiawa because this is the extent of the Navy's water system and their source, the Waiawa shaft is up here. And primarily Waimalu and Moanalua where the Redhill Hill Tank Farm is located. So first of all, let's talk about our deep monitor well data. I'm going to show you the areas that the three deep monitor wells that i'm gonna sort of talk to you about with respect to what we're seeing in the aquifer. First of all, there's aipio Mauko Well. This is, if you know the area, this is located on the road headed up to the Mililani Mortuary. This is located within the Waipahu Waiawa Aquifer System area. We have a Waimalu Deep Monitor Well that's located within the Waimalu Aquifer System area. And we also have our Halawa Deep Monitor well, which is also actually located within Waimalua. And then this boundary right here is the Waimalua Aquifer System. So I want to show you, this is a little bit of a blow up. So these are the Halawa and the Waimalui Deep Monitor Well locations relative to some critical shaft some reference for the location of the Halawa Deep Monitor well, and the Waimauwa Deep Monitor well and what this is what the data is telling us about the aquifer relative to the sheds. And feel free to stop me if you have questions on specific slides or anything that I'm saying that might be easier than than going going back at the end, but it's certainly up to you guys. So let's talk about the aquifer health and those monitor gloves. The Commission looks to aquifer health by assessing data which we plot, showing historic elevations of a couple of things. The water level that we initially encounter when we drop our equipment down the well, the top at midpoint of the transition zones from fresh to salt water. In the following slides, you're going to see data compiled from field investigations that our survey branch has done near Red Hill facility. And these data are presented as a time series. So first of all, if you can remember Halawa Deep Monitor Well, Halawa Deep Monitor Well is located on the Halawa prison site. And this is something that we're not quite sure about, but the thickness of the freshwater lands, and I'll show you the profile in the next slide, the thickness of the freshwater lands located near Palawa Deep Monitor Well is obscured by an upflow of brackish water in the well. And so I'll explain that a little bit more in the next slide. However, the elevations of the top of the transition zone, midpoint of the transition zone, and the location of seawater indicate that the conditions are relatively stable in this region of the aquafib. So going to the next slide, you'll see that there were some, I think a little bit of decline prior to 2010. We're still trying to figure out what that's attributed to, but as you can see, since around 2010, 2011, this is the water table. This is the top of the transition zone. This is the midpoint of the transition zone, and this is seawater. And I will note that, again, the brackish upflow has kind of made us question the thickness of the brackish lens. But I will also note that this gets a little bit technical, but we have a way of estimating the midpoint of the transition zone is through the Geiben-Hertzberg equation. The Geiben-Hertzberg equation takes into account the water table above mean sea level and calculates the midpoint of the transition zone as about 40 times the initial head. So if it's one foot, it's 40 feet. If it's two feet, it's 80 feet, and so on. So this line here represents what we would calculate from Geibenherzberg as the midpoint of the transition zone. Fortunately, it appears that the midpoint of the transition zone is still far below the Geibenherzberg calculated midpoint of the transition zone is still far below the Geibenherzberg calculated midpoint of the transition zone. So what is this telling us? It's telling us that based on what we know despite the up-full war flow of the brackish water, we think that it's both relatively stable and relatively healthy because this midpoint is far below what we would calculate as the midpoint of the transition zone. So that's data on our Halawa Deep Monitor. Next, let's go to Waimalu. So Waimalu is located, I suppose, northwest of the Red Hill fuel tank storage facility. It does appear that the freshwater lands in Waimalu continues to thicken, indicating that it's probable that there's a long-term influx of freshwater from the Hohelau's. And the second point is just, it's something that we're kind of speculating, so it's by no means definitive. But the presence of this increasing thickness of freshwater makes us theorize that there may be a hydraulic buffer for the halawa shaft that deflects releases migrating northwest across halawa valley from the bulk storage facility again and that's a theory so we can't define that yet but as you'll see at the end of my presentation data is being collected to understand what's happening with respect to the bloom. And so you see that at the end. So that's why Malou. Yeah, Ryan. So theory, that theory, how would that affect contaminants that would come out of the Redhill facility? Yeah, so thank you, Commissioner buck so i i guess our theory is that if there is a high flux of water coming from the koalas there could there could potentially be a hydraulic buffer between halava between the bulk storage facility and Halawa shaft, but that sort of remains to be seen with the data that we are collecting from, or not that we're collecting, but the Navy is, and their consultants are collecting from the monitor wells. Does that answer your question? So the volume of water would deflect any contaminants and stop its westward movement? Is that what I'm hearing? Yeah, I mean, in theory, I don't know if that it would deflect it, but it would suggest that because there's a large quantity of water coming down from the bullets. And again, you know, the location of, let me back up a couple of slides so um so the location of uh location of waimalu deep monitor well it's you know it's all the way over here the facility is actually right here right so yeah um so you know there's this you know one of the one of the thoughts that our geologists had was that because so much water is coming down and we see a thickening of the lens here, could that suggest that there's, rather than having lateral flow this way, does it help to deflect the flow away from Palawa Shack with those contaminants coming from the fuel storage tank facility? That's just, again, it's just a theory. So I don't want to really put too much weight into that right now until data is collected from uh from the monitor wells ryan if if theory is important what's the process for either proving it or negating it so i know that as part of the and and perhaps uh um commissioner sito can um can address this i know that there were portions of the um administrative order on consent that required uh determination of groundwater flow patterns and and groundwater modeling so um i don't know that our theory would necessarily be um how do i say this i think that we would we would understand better if the the thickening of the lens in the context of what the models are um estimating does that make sense not to me. Okay, just go ahead. Go ahead, finish this. Oh, no, I was just gonna say that I don't think that that I mean it could be the data that we're collecting from this deep monitor. Well, could certainly be used by whoever's preparing the model in estimating groundwater flow but in and of itself i don't know that that we that that provides us enough data to really make a uh a defining statement on groundwater flow patterns because again you'll see the proximity of this well to the fuel tank fuel tank facility and you see the location of Palawa Shack, it's far enough away that it really is just a theory right now that would be validated once the model gets created. And if our data can be used as an input parameter to the model, that's a good thing, right? But I'm not a modelerer i don't understand that component of it so um again i think that perhaps our theory may be validated by whatever the model tells us uh but i'm not sure that we can really make any definitive statement about it i hope that makes sense. Yeah, quick question. Ryan, you know, so we, you're groundwater, you focus on sort of what you can measure from a borehole. And that's just, but that's just like one sort of way of looking at health. Have there been seepage runs done in this area? Can we consider health, you know, if we have gaining streams in this area and i don't know if there are can we um get a sense of the health has staff kind of considered sort of multiple streams of data together because we might just be looking at like the pulse and blood pressure when we need to be looking at, I don't know, lung capacity, you know, like other multiple metrics of aquifer health. Have we fully squeezed the sea worm USGS data? Thank you. That is a great question. Right now, you know, we're sort of tasked, we are a very small branch within sea worm um really focusing a lot of our efforts on statewide monitoring especially as emerging issues come out in kona that's not emerging it's been it's been emerged for quite a while now um and lahaina and so we we have a staff of basically 2 guys that are going out to to to evaluate. We are incidentally and thank you to deputy manual. We are expanding our monitor. Well, program to expand out. But you know, regarding seep it runs and stream data, you know i'll let maybe Dr stroke and and and the branch chief Dean maybe comment on that to really assess aquifer health as a you know more holistic manner. think you hit on the head um our groundwater guys are good at what they do right evaluating water levels chlorides the profile right of our aquifer and oftentimes um the changes in groundwater take years if not decades to see right over time so it's kind of just monitoring that it's not a you know rain event when all of a sudden our aquifer increases um exponentially um but with that said we do know there's interaction and there's additional data sets and data gaps that we potentially need to fill kind of mirror you know rifting a foot church and mentioned we the more data we have the better um and more informed decisions will be made um holistically as it relates to aquifer health. So there are studies here, these are gaining streams. So there is a groundwater surface water connection per my initial conversations with Dr. Schroff. And if that's him, he can also add in. But there's spring sources as we're aware, along the coast, which also indicate kind of this interaction or something, geology, right, creating that space for ground and surface water interaction. So we do look at it holistically. A lot of it's just taking the components of groundwater research the components of surface waters research data from department of health and uh and kind of putting that together and then looking at okay well what is the management recommendations that we want to propose our primary tool in in this region is water use permit right and the conditions of you know the withdrawal of water and the conditions of the withdrawal of water and the impact that it has on both ground and surface water resources, as well as public trust uses. So it's all connected. I just wanna, I think we can add more to this. This is just one component, and we wanted to respond to the question from, I think it was from your question about, can we have a conversation about the data that we're collecting? We hear a lot of DOH we can we have a conversation about the data that we're collecting we hear a lot of doh data we hear a lot about navy data well what is the data that we're collecting um that's the purpose of today's presentation share that with you get feedback on if you want us to focus or there's things that you're seeing are missing let us know and we can look at what resources we have to try to try to fill those gaps so so the short answer is any streams we don't have we haven't put together the multiple streams of data but according to deep monitor wells looks pretty good the groundwater aqua for health at this point yeah and he'll keep going through the rest of the system i don't want to hold that up. Yeah, that's the general summary. I think you bring that well. Okay, so I believe this is where I left off, I think. We were looking at particularly why model would be monitor well and how that thick lens thickening is maybe suggesting a hydraulic buffer. So as you can see, as a time series, we have the water table actually rose. It rose about maybe 18 and 1 half feet from May to April. From 2005 to 2023. We do see again a thickening of the transition zone here. And this is again, Diven-Hertzberg. So this is telling us that where it should be, and maybe it's arriving at a steady state condition, I don't know, but this is the data that we're collecting from Mobile Model Deep Monitor. So the last well that we're going to look at is the Waipio-Mauka Deep Monitor well. And again, Shucks, you know what? I'll give you a little bit better information on this as we go through the Navy system well. But again, this is the Waipio Mauka Deep Monitor Well that's located right off of the road going up towards the summit, towards that Miligani Cemetery. So we see in this well, the freshwater lands continues to slowly bend about, well, about 100 feet. I don't know if you can say that's slow, but it's been 37 years since we've seen that. The elevation of the midpoint of the transition zone shows a gentle rise. But again, the current elevation is still below the calculated Geiben-Hertzberg elevation, which indicates to us that the current thickness is greater than expected. So going to the next slide, you can see again, this is Geiben-Hertzberg, that's the midpoint of, this is the midpoint of the transition zone. So this is the top of the transition zone. So this is the top of the transition zone. So we are quite significantly below the calculated Guybert-Kurtzberg midpoint of the transition zone. And again, this well is located kind of close to the Navy's Uyi abashak which they are they've placed a hundred percent reliance on to supply water for this so that's a good segue into the next portion of my presentation which is talking about navy system pumping centers so right ryan excuse. Before you go on to the next chapter, I'm just curious. The thickening has occurred since 2005. Might the Waihohe water decision and or the diminished use of water for sugar have contributed to less withdrawal and more uh retainment. So um so it appears that way peel Malka has um actually um it that the the water level is rising, but we're also seeing um um a rise of the midpoint of the top of the transition zone and the midpoint of the transition zone so you know that would suggest some some kind of um i don't know i mean at this point could that suggest some kind of depletion i'm not really sure um yeah that's a great question i mean we we with respect to Waihole, we see development tunnels are quite still actively in use. And I believe that the development tunnels are on the windward side. They do extend. It appears that they may extend hydrologically possibly into the Waipahu Waiafa aquifer system so whether the development tunnels are depleting recharge of Waipahu Waiafa that's a that's a great question although know, I think that I'm trying to think of the timeline now. I'm trying to think of Waipole Ditch with respect to, you know, the pineapple fields on the Kunia side, and when things started actually transitioning over from the transition from sugar to pineapple, and then pineapple to what's being seen in Kunia as, you know, what we're seeing is diversified crops and some seed corn. I think seed corn is kind of diminishing. I've really got to take a look at the data for what's, you know, for the Waihole withdrawals. Waihole is interesting interesting right because they what they do is there's a valve at the um at the north portal that i think is north portal that they turn on and off depending on how much rainfall they get on the leeward side there's also a development tunnel while a development tunnel that actually develops water um the leeward side, that's never really sort of shut off, right? So it's hard for me to, all that to say that I think it's hard for me to attribute any kind of changes in the aquifer, you know, mauka, or even within waipio mauka as being attributed to sugar production, or the reduction of sugar production, or the change in agricultural use. So I guess the short answer is, I don't know. I know I can be wordy, but it takes, sometimes I'm processing my thoughts as i'm speaking i can interject i wanted to um suggest scott izuka from usgs they released a really interesting groundwater availability scenarios report in april and so maybe that can be they're coming next time okay you're already on it sorry we try to get you the cutting edge yeah yeah well wrc hosted him so the the um recording there might be a previous recording online and then we'll hear next month so i think that'll help us because it was really helpful to see his maps and and have that dialogue shall i continue yep, go ahead. Okay, so again, talking about now we're segwaying into the Navy pumping centers. So I'm going to show you on the next map the 3 shaft sources that the Navy has for the system. Ayahalawa shaft is the smallest source. This has an allocation of 0.697 MGD. Redapa Shaft is the most productive shaft within the Waiapa aquifer system. And it has an allocation of 14.977 MGD. And I will note that these are all are under a public water system. So here's a map that shows you basically the extent of the Navy system. You can see how far i mean it extends all the way out into fort island and then obviously out into the west lock portion airport point um again huayaba shaft is the farthest uh sort of uh that's not farthest north, I guess, on the system. And I was mentioning that the our YPO Monca Monanoa is like around here somewhere. This is the Navy's Taya Halawa shaft, which this is the small allocation, like 0.497. And this is Red Hill shaft, which is located right next to the field tank farm. So and this one has the allocation of about four point, I don't know, under five MG. So again, here's a better map showing the location of the shafts. Here's Guayaba shaft, here's Ayahalaba, here's Renio shaft. So let's look at the pumpage prior to the fuel release and the resulting change in pumpage as a response. So in November of 2021, oh, this doesn't look good, right? Like they were pumping 0.272. They were within their allocation for Ayah-Halawa shaft. Again, that's a small source. Wayaba shaft, they were over pumping very small on a 12-month moving average, but they were over pumping it. And Red Hill shaft was over pumping by about a half a million gallons per day. So this doesn't look good. Combined 12-month moving average pumpage of 20.363 MGD. So the following three slides are just an indication. And this is kind of, it's a little bit, I don't wanna be misleading about it because it's hard to tell by the scale, right? If we're looking at the scale of this, this is really just 0.8 million gallons per day. So we're seeing, the scale of this, this is really just point eight million gallons per day. So we're seeing we saw a decrease in time series of the 12 month moving average from about. So we saw the graphs I'm providing you from 2020 to the present. And you see a reduction of how they basically took a lot of a shot offline. I think they were pumping it for some testing purposes or whatever. Red Hill Shaft, let's see. So I think since, I can't remember the date, but they started pumping Red Hill Shaft in order to induce like a plume containment situation. Is that right, Commissioner Zico? And so they exceeded their allocation. Of course, the allocation that the commission issued was for consumptive purposes, but they converted Redhill shaft over to pumping it for plume containment. So you'll, again, I don't want this to be sort of well, you can see I mean it's it's it's a it was about above their allocation. Maybe they they they peaked by about point 2 Mgb at one point, and then started stepping down their pumpage of radio shaft. And then the last graph again I think this is this this one's a little bit confusing, because you'll see my time series goes from 12.5 to 17. So if I had it, it went all the way down to 0 I think you'd have a better idea of how much they were over pumping. While my shop and i'm not making excuses for the navy by any means. But why, of a shaft was is the only source that's online to supply their entire water system. So you can see how much in excess they did pump. We are keeping tabs on both their pumpage and the chlorides of guava shaft on a more finer scale. So let's talk about the change in pumpage in response to the release. Red Hill Shaft stopped in December 2021 and resumed on January 29, 2022 for flume containment, and they've been pumping an average of about 4.2 mgb. Pumpage ceased at Ayahalava Shaft at the same time. Pumps started up again in September of 2022, and I think they just run the pumps periodically, just for a couple of days a month, and they only pump about 100,000 gallons a month. And then, I'm sorry, and then, Wayava Shaft has always been, again, that's the one that they exceeded their allocation for. And we've discovered or they've discovered leaks in the system that can speak to why they were over pumping. And at a certain point, they pumped 16.993 million gallons per day. But again, they're reducing pumping guayaba I think partly due to some efficiency measures and also they had fixed there was a big leak in the pearl harbor peninsula that they fixed and so you see that their 12 month moving average as of May 2023 is 14.9 mgd, which is below their elevation. And again, just leak in the water system just for clarification, because that was we did this presentation prior and there was concern that it was in the actual fuel system. No, it's the water system that Ryan's talking about thank you yeah that I should have been a little clearer about that I think it was it was those kinds of water distribution leaks that you see in all big water systems right for the water supply and so discovered one and I think this is I think maybe that's part of the silver lining in this whole situation is it's caused us to put a lot more scrutiny on the Navy's data with respect to both the pumpage, aquifer health, and particularly salinity. So this slide shows the current pumpage. And then you see that, okay, Ayahalawa Shaft basically offline um why off a shaft they were brought you know they brought their pumpage down below their allocation uh red hill shaft again below their allocation although this is for plume containment this is not feeding into the system and you see that the combined uh 12 month moving average is 18.972 from 20.363 as of november of. So can they sustain running the system with one source? Yes. Is that a good idea? Probably not because if Yava shaft goes down, they don't have water for this. The one thing that we wanted to make sure that we looked at was chlorides and because chlorides give us an indication of for health. And so this is a plot of chloride. So you'll see this scale is pumpage in million gallons per day. This scale is parts in terms of parts per million. So you see some variability. The orange dots are the cards and you see some variability, but it's relatively pretty stable and pretty good at about maybe 130, 130 parts per million. Wyaba shaft is the one that I think we're really, that we're a lot more interested in because as they increase pumpage from Wyaba shaft to support the system, what does that tell us about the chlorides? Well, the chlorides, I mean, this is, it's relatively fresh water, right? Like between 35 and maybe a high of 44 parts per million. So we see some variability with respect to pumpage, but not too much. That takes me through the Navy's water sources. Did you guys have any questions on that section before you Ryan? Aurora has a question. So so while the pumping is declining, but we're heading into summer. And do you have any in general that's you know high water demand time. The implication there is that it's probably not going to continue going down over the summer and they will likely be exceeding that specific allocation for that. What measures or have there been any dialogues around that? I can start. What measures or have there been any dialogues around that? I mean, I can start. Ryan, real quick, the graph here shows summer month usage. So if you look at it on the 12th map, they still fall within their allocation. So in the bottom frames, right, you know, basically July through August or that period. Those are summer months where you would see higher use. So I mean in general we are, what's been great is they've been recording daily, which we we don't ask of anybody else in the state. So the Navy has been really really really good at getting us this data that's the only reason why we're able to track it at this scale yeah um over time and then we it is on a 12th map right with the idea that during summer periods there might be increased pumping to meet demands and needs but we also ramp up our conservation efforts working with our planning office and our conservation work. So those are some of the strategies that we're working with the Navy, even anybody from the state on is conservation strategies and job preparedness. Right. Yeah, because it's not looking the other way. You're not looking great. It is going to be a prolonged drought per per models right and predictions so i'm ryan sorry sorry to jump in but go ahead no no that's that's no that's a that's a that's a great um great thing to add so we also as kalio mentioned we are looking at um both pumpage and chloride data on a finer scale. And normally what we would require of any well owner, shaft owner, whatever, is monthly water use and monthly chloride data to be submitted. Because of the concern that you brought up, not just for the summer months, but just in general as they increase the pumpage, we were looking at daily pumpage and weekly chloride data to be submitted so that we can kind of start to get a handle. Are we seeing chloride starting to increase as they're pumping fire. Again, if the past two years of beta is any indication, I don't think we're going to see chloride increases as the approach to summer months. But we'll continue to keep a handle on the data and present anything to you if we see that anything is, you know, if there's any adverse impacts on on the aquifer thanks okay thanks so i'll move on to the next the final section um i wanted to give you guys a um uh a briefing on the navy monitor world permit so it's it's uh this is this is an interesting and i EAB – James Cousins drill wells to produce water. We also permit deep monitor wells and permanent deep monitor wells. But a lot of environmental wells that are being done to assess aquifer water quality are done through, you know, via the underground storage tank program at DOH or other environmental programs. So typically, we hadn't been permitting these types of environmental monitor wells. Well, back in around, I think, 2015 and maybe prior to that, we started permitting the monitor wells for the Navy. And I think it's a good thing for the commission to be involved because as we know, there's contamination in the area for the Navy to be constructing the wells in accordance with our well standards will help us to ensure that if there's a contamination in the vatals or the unsaturated zone above the aquifer, adhering to our well standards will help prevent contaminant from entering the aquifer from above. Not to say that DOH wouldn't be able to do that, but I think our well standards are are sufficiently designed to protect both that from happening and also from maybe perch water from entering an ungrounded annular space and entering the basal. So so all that to say that we have been permitting maybe monitor wells. There are 23 existing navy monitor wells right now in all of these various locations. There are eight new proposed Navy monitor wells that we have applications in for that are under review. This shows the location of the Navy monitor wells with respect to the fuel tank farm so this is the fuel tank farm right here and then water quality data from the monitor well so um we we don't have the expertise within groundwater to analyze water quality data but um thank you to commissioner sito for sending me this yesterday. Here are some websites that anybody can go to, commissioners, general public can go to to get water quality data from the monitor well. So there's the DOH's Red Hill information website. There's the EPA's groundwater results application, which was just released I think last month or two months ago and then there's the navy's joint base pearl harbor red hill environmental website and that's uh basically all i hope oh yeah let's start the recording again just yeah you can just press start recording it's connecting like it's not sensing something okay there we go so that concludes my presentation i'm happy to answer any questions that you guys have or i think i see commissioner c plus one so i'll deflect some questions to her too but okay thank you so mike yeah uh ryan thanks a lot um i know the monitoring wells are critical especially the ones in in the west they get a much better idea of what's in the aquifer and the plume flow. I know we've got some issues with liability and trying to put the appropriate monitoring wells in, but let's say we put them in there and again, the the commission's kuleana is really going to be long term aquifer remediation and recovery. What kind of time frame, assuming we get the wells in, did you project before we could start making some determinations of kind of the plume and i know theoretical we we don't know but this is an issue that is going to be with the commission for quite a while uh do you do you have any any projections of time frames once the monitoring wells are in for us to begin to draw some kind of rational observations. Yeah. And I don't want to misspeak, and Joanna is certainly here to correct me if I say anything wrong or even expand on what I might say. But I know that initially, was it at a FTAC or field tank advisory committee meeting, say, but I know that initially, was it at a FTAC, a field tank advisory committee meeting, Joanna, that I think that either EPA or DOH presented on some sort of spatial analysis on plume locations, but I don't know that there's been a time series to represent any sort of changes with respect to how um how plume containment was maybe and and solid um commissioner seat will sort of expand on that if you can but just for a quick item most of monitor wells are just around the the red hill facility we really have not collected data the wells aren't even in yet. So yeah, thank you. So I will say that I think that there are like like the majority. I I'd say just about all of the wells are navy wells. I know that the Board of Water Supply has, I believe, one monitor well in, and I believe they're applying or are looking to apply for one or two more. So I think that the, you know, I kind of see where you're going with this, because I know we had talked about this before, but I'm trying to establish sentinel wells between the field tank facility and Palawa shaft. But I don't have a timeline for that. I think that's going to be a Board of Water Supply question. But with an assumption basically where we're talking years, having to put the wells in and hopefully we'll get that done and then actually getting the data for a certain amount of timeframes until there's a comfort level that border water supply could open up the shaft again that's really more like years rather than months uh that you know that's kind of hard to say i mean the the we um staff has been um sort of staff has been addressing the deep uh the monitor well applications as fast as we can in order to aid in the um in in assessing um what's happening um and you know they've been coming in for maybe I want to say maybe 15 wells a year or so um and they've been getting them online relatively quickly. Maybe within about a year. Again, I can't speak on behalf of the Navy, but they've expanded out their drilling sort of roster into maybe three or four drillers at this point, whereas they only had one driller prior. And I think they're just trying to accelerate drilling monitor wells all over the place so it's hard for me to say but based on the plan it would appear that maybe within a year or two as far as what has been planned so far i think all of the wells should be in place and online i i that's my best estimate maybe real quick uh we did make a request because they are collecting data now in whatever wells have been completed um to the navy in their next quarterly update which is next month unfortunately um to provide kind of like if possible a summary of what they're seeing. You know, we have some wells completed, what is the data showing us now? And can that help to inform some of our management decisions. So we put in the requests and hoping to get some report back from from the Navy next month. I mean, I've been to the meetings, the Navy is we're ready, they're ready to go up a major issue is a lot of them are private land and the private land owner is not comfortable they want some liability protection in case they find something and so that's and i know doh has been working i mean that's something but uh yeah until we get those west monitoring wells in we still really have don't have much of an idea yeah it's definitely isolated around the field all right ryan do you have a chat opportunity to um sort of i know synthesizes right word but um take in like epa for water supply and put them all together so that we have a larger visual of all of the different wells? And are they all in sync or are they different? Or what impacts do those additional well information have for you? Yeah, let me think about this. So I think that at a certain point we did a collaborative effort with USGS. I wish Patrick were here. Patrick is our geologist and Bob, I wish they were here talking about how they calibrated um the the elevation surveys of all of the wells in the area um but in terms of sinking data i mean um i think that the websites that i had mentioned have results of all of the monitor wells in the area i'm not sure that they have uh commissioner cito i don't think they have water water supply James Heiting. And then, if you're looking at the data, you know, the data that's being collected, you know, the data that's being collected by the state, you know, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, the state, you know, a lot of we're we trust in our lane, right? So we're really focusing on a lot of times the aquifer health from a quantity and chloride perspective, which is kind of the sweet spot we fit in, in relation to the Department of Health EPA was is managing the water quality data sets from these well fields. Putting them together is definitely something that we need to try to do more of and be better at, but a lot of the focus has been quality metrics that have been presented. So we can talk about it and see if there's a way for us to use some of maybe the existing data sharing sites that DOH or EPA or the Navy has set up and then plug in some of our you know quantitative data into that okay and maybe that's a that's a that's a task for UH yeah I was going to suggest I mean you know USGS is very well you know they have a really strong group of geologists hydrologists and then then we reach as well so I think kind of helping different organizations find their goal in the network questions are where the data is and once the data is available they you just point them and that's okay people get very excited when there's data yeah okay so i'll pass that word back yes thank you ryan any does any board members commission have any questions for ryan first off right sorry so this is going back to the chlorides being stable at Red Hill shaft and I was wondering because Halava shut off, you know, I mean and Halava used to be a big draw is do you think that plays into the chloride story there or it's just the aquifer can have and you know. You know that that's a that that is a good question um i i would have to look at the data for um the water use reported data from red hill shaft and compare that to uh you know prior to um halava and then um and then post shutdown of Halawa shaft. Again, if our theory or if our geologist theory holds true that large influx of water from the Po'olaus would maybe could possibly suggest that the shutdown of Halawa shaft wouldn't impact Red Hill shaft in a significant way any other questions or comments do have it jonathan you've been with us the whole meeting did you want to were you here to participate in a particular item uh not at this time Mahalo other than I was going to when it comes to it thank Commissioner Buck for his years okay thank you very much I thought so okay anybody else so so my takeaway is generally good news nothing disturbing in disturbing in the data you presented, Ryan? Well, not from a water quality standpoint, right? Because again, we can't really comment on the perspective of the presence of contaminants in the aquifer. As far as aquifer health and depletion, that's really where, again, as Kaleo mentioned, that's our sweet spot, right? So based on our increased monitoring of what's happening with respect to Yaba shaft and looking at our deep monitor well data, we are relatively confident that any changes in system pumpage isn't affecting the aquifers in a negative way okay thank you and second to kaleo uh the last last month or the month before the navy made a presentation which really created an opportunity to kind of create a dashboard of various uh important uh task completions or objectives and milestones that we could track? Have we kind of done anything with that? Will we be seeing that on some routine basis, quarterly perhaps? I'm hoping to try to figure out whether it's some kind of informational briefing submittal that we have that we can kind of evaluate what we're seeing related to what they've presented um or just have the navy present on those three things every quarter so they've agreed i i've consistently reached out and they agreed to be back in july to update us on those kind of three focal points of the work that they're doing um i'm hopeful that until the fuel is removed or the facility is closed that they're committed, at least we've gotten commitments from leadership right now, that they'll be here. So it is those three threads and those focuses are where we want to have them provide those updates. But I like the idea of kind of keeping the destination targets solid and then measuring milestone and progress. Yeah, I think it's milestones along the way. I think one of the, in my opinion, kind of seeing the big picture of things, the biggest issue is the remediation. We haven't gotten there yet, right. The focus right now has been on defueling safely the facility. But you know, I think we've been really consistent at the fuel tank advisory commission committee meetings and others that are subject matter expert meetings that've done the feeling but we need to have those conversations now and set those goals um we can change as we get more data but we really need to um yeah know where it's where we're going hi ryan has the navy formed and stood up an organization to meet your expectations moving forward to provide you timely data? And how does that organization look as to what they've had historically there? I mean, I guess it depends on what you mean by what we're looking at. From staff's perspective, we are primarily looking at getting like a finer to reporting of their water use, which that came from NAVFAC directly. So in that sense, no, as Khalil mentioned, we are commission is part of the both the fuel tank advisory committee, as well as various subject matter. Expert groups. maybe the the most significant being the remediation round table. So as far as particular commission objectives, yeah, there's there's really there's really nothing that we look at in terms of larger group. Although, you know, informally we do consult with several geologists throughout the state about geologic issues as they pertain to monitor wells. Otherwise, commission staff is advisory to the field tank. Well, we're part of the field tank advisory committee as well as subject matter experts oh right is there an opportunity one of the to me issues is that your groundwater staff is sort of limited could we avail the Navy's conscience and hopefully some of their accountability to help improve getting groundwater data to what would normally be your function in doing it, but take advantage of that if they're putting in 35 sentinel wells around the area. Can we task them No, that's passing to do James Heiting. more. James Heiting. That's a great question, and actually a timely for me to let you know, my thing has always been, I would prefer for us to be collecting the data rather than the Navy to be collecting the data because, you know, validation data validation is an issue and for us to do that stuff in house. It gives me much more confidence that we can make better assessments on offer help. So we did get four new positions I'm in the process of uh trying to figure out how to fill those positions and how to write the position description so um but whether the navy can contribute to that yeah i would love that you know well i think they're obligated to do something now if i can add to that so you know the government well the state of haw well, the state of Hawaii, the state and the counties created this unified statement. Part of the goal of this unified statement or this coalition is to bring all of the different agencies together, including the county, to hold the Navy accountable for more than just remediation. I mean, so we sit on that and my concern is it's not just water quality and water quantity, but the health of our ecosystem. Like what impact does this have to the near-shore waters, up on the streams, up Malka? So we are trying to leverage the Navy through this opportunity to require them to do more data, you know, have them responsible because there's a whole question as to, as you say, right, the validation. I mean, we're only getting information from what the Navy's providing us. We are not having the opportunity to necessarily ground truth that, and that's why to me, having collaboration with other, you know, other monitoring wells, whether the Board of Water Supplier, but I think it right now is the opportunity for us to hold the Navy accountable. Cause if our goal is not just, just you know clean water with infiltration i mean far from that i mean we want to be able to have clean water for future generations that doesn't have to all have to go through filtration we also want to have clean water so our resources are taken care of so the part of the mission of this unified statement, this coalition, is to draft federal legislation and to get money to finance this. And it shouldn't be funded by the state of Hawaii. It should be financed by the United States. speaking going through that process to try to be very comprehensive and inclusive and bring the right people to the table to begin to identify what's you know what what's our long-term goal and then working backwards how do we how do we get sufficient information data resources to get us to that point so we are being very cognizant of that for sure yeah any other questions or comments to staff ryan or anybody else on this update and kaleo's right i think you did confirm with the navy they'll be here so yeah so they are keeping to their commitment to do quarterly updates to us following up on that first meeting. So with that, this was just informational briefing, right? So I'm having no other comments or questions. Thank you very much, Ryan, for a very comprehensive overview. Look at all those guitars. Yeah, yeah, you're right. I'm trying to- I told you the one's on the wall. Yeah, there you go. I'm sure we got plenty more. Yeah, I wanna be cautiously optimistic about the the data that you gave us and the health um but you know preliminary we still got a lot more so with that being said this item is closed and one more item yes item d1 is just uh chance our farewell address from our commissioner just super and uh and uh you know formal you guys got some formal written comments over there for the record but uh i do have some other comments last time you'll hear me talk uh at least on this side of the table um i know many of you here when commissioner beamer gave his uh goodbye comments i think he identified 41 different streams that we set in stream flow standards during his tenure, which somewhat overlap. And so it had me thinking about, why what's happened over the past eight years that we've been so productive. You know, a lot of our decisions were called historic and surprising. And i think we've been really blessed because uh the time was really really right to have those decisions plantation agriculture was totally gone we had lengthy contested cases that were ready to be resolved we had a really diverse a a range of commissioners as well. And so I wanna reflect a little bit on what did we learn over the past eight years and how might the commission improve how it works? So I came up, the commission is more effective when we have time to work together, when we have adequate and timely data from the staff, when we have an understanding of stakeholder issues and we have ability to address those issues over larger geographical areas. I think those numbers drill down a little bit. You know, as we know, it's all frustrating that the commissioners cannot talk to one another and only in public. And I think some of our best work has been in some of the protracted contested case issues when we really can sit down together and we come up with value-added products from our different perspectives and and so uh i i think it's important to try to increase that we did the permitted interaction group which I think is really useful. And I think that's an underutilized thing, a way to have a certain number of commissioners. And I understand the evolution of the legal issues. We're not doing backroom smoke-filled things, we're not. And I think it's important for the public to actually see us interact. I don't think they realize after four or five hours of public testimony, we don't know what we're gonna say to each other yet. You know, the show hasn't really even started yet. So I think the interaction between the commissioners is really important. And that the issue of the contested case issue and where that is, I understand why it's there. I'm not suggesting, but broken. It's a broken system. It does allow us, you guys were on Kauai when we did the Wai'aleale stream. Four or five hours of pretty heated public testimony. We had just started deliberations. Someone called for a contested case. Everything stopped. No more discussion. It turned out that entity did not even started deliberations someone called for a contested case everything stopped no more discussion and it turned out that entity did not even have you know the proper stay standing so I think there's we should can really think about how we reform the contested case because I think if the commission and staff have time for a couple months to try to work out a compromise and work with stakeholders and then come back and maybe make a decision, I think we can resolve a lot of that stuff. People want to contest the case, that's fine. There are advantages. We get to sit together and deal with it takes too long it's too expensive uh legal issues and we might not even agree with the hearings officers report and end up having to go back and i think we found in numerous situations where we go back and ask people can you rescind your contested case so we can actually sit down and talk so maybe legally there's a two or three months time out we're not making a decision but we're going to work on the issue come back in the public forum try again and maybe there's a way that we can actually work so i'm not suggesting we get rid of the contested cases but uh it's time to have a kind of a serious discussion how to reform that with stakeholders so that's one obviously adequate and timely data from staff is critical and we're sitting with some of our best staff right here that does it i think it's time i know it's hard you know when i was at dofa we reorganized to have decentralized, so we could have someone on each island who had the authority and the responsibility to make decisions. We have so many in-stream flow standards, we can't manage this as effectively from Honolulu anymore, and we only have one errand. Eventually, setting up some organization where you have someone on each island, especially on Maui, where we have really active community groups. And I know Claire, you're well aware of that, but it's time to kind of move toward that. We've gotten bigger now. We have enforcement and regulatory structures, you know, I mean, in stream flow standards all over the island. So I think it's time to, however you can manage that to start doing that um the third one is you know the more we know about our stakeholders the better you know covid has changed our public hearings forever i don't think we're ever going to go back to in in person i think it's been an improvement we're getting testimony from all sorts of people um it's hard for the chair to manage sometimes as a three-minute warning and you know after four or five hours of public testimony commission has a pretty good idea where people are and are people the same thing so i don't have any suggestions but i i think it has changed the way we'll be doing hearings forever now and maybe there's ways to make it more efficient somehow having the testifiers know what other people are testifying so they can consolidate maybe pre-recording public testimony so people have a chance i I haven't really thought that through, but we know this hybrid meetings are a way of the future and we have to deal with that. And then finally, wherever we can, if we can do larger geographical areas, and look at the difference between the East Maui decision, and I go back to Kauai, Wai'aleale, where we were stuck with one stream because of a time limit on an application to the borderland natural resources there's more water in that drainage than any other drainage in the whole state and if we would have an ability i think we're trying to really look at a larger geographical area we can deal with the ecosystem issues, we can deal with the balancing that we need to do between our public trust priorities. And so wherever we can, sometimes we're stuck with having to deal with a stream. But anyway, we can combine that within the larger area. And I think East Maui was a classic example. Really, we had a clean palette for almost the first time to really implement the water code because we had 27 streams, we had really enough water. We really could make the balancing. Nāvēha was a lot harder and well, Kansi apologized to staff because we know implementation of that was gonna be horrible because we had private delivery systems, we had contested already with the water use. And so I know as you start dealing with Lanai, I'm so glad we didn't, oh, let's just take this aquifer, take the list large geographical pieces you can, because that allows you to make the appropriate decisions i remiss not to talk about red hill we talked about it a lot and and i'll just say shortly i'm i'm okay where we are right now we have the navy's attention doh is all in and that's good epa is all in and that's good although you can all in and that's good. Although you can never trust a federal agency to stick up for what the state's interests are. But I still would urge in this all in concept that the state of Hawaii needs a comprehensive legal regulatory and enforcement strategy because we have to put constant pressure and it is all about our kuleana aquifer remediation and recovery and knock on wood once the fuel is out you know people the energy are going to let down and we are still stuck with some of these issues that we're talking about and so this commission unanimously recommended modifying their water permit. Take a look at their water permit. There is none, it's grandfathered in. We're giving 20 million gallons a day to the Navy with no conditions whatsoever. And you ask in the public meetings, people ask EPA, well, what happens if they don't, if they don't follow the plan? Oh, we'll find them. No, that's just taxpayer money. DOH can find them, but that's just money. But connecting their responsibility to clean up the aquifer with their use of the water. If we need to cut back, they need to cut back. So I still would urge the Water Commission when the time is right and when we know more about the monitoring data so we have a better feel of what is involved in aquifer recovery mediation we start the public process because it will be a commission oriented where we go out to the public and say we want to plan for aquifer recovery mediation what does it look like and i think that's the time for um for the commission to step up in its regulatory role like i said i'm happy where we are right now we got people's attention doh is all in and you know i've been to every one of the f tech and all the different meetings and so we have their attention but once they safely defuel uh we're still left with those issues, which are going to probably transcend the timeframe of most everyone here at the table. So it's important that we do that. And my last one, and this one is, I'm not giving up yet. In 78, they made water, there is no private ownership of water. Water code in 81. Sustainability, you know, is a three-legged table, biological, social, and economic. There is no economic underpinnings for the Water Commission and the Water Code. We don't have, we're not connected at all outside of potential fines and administrative fees. We don't charge anything for water. Water is not free. The public trust responsibilities that we're supposed to manage are not free. And we haven't yet made that connection. And even now the Board of Land and Water Resources is struggling to try to figure out, well, at least in our designated area, in the lease, how much do we charge people for water? But basically to be sustainable, the water code has to have an economic underpinning, which means there needs to be some way to connect the value of the water with the management of the water resource. And so that's still an outstanding issue. I've talked to Cleo about it a lot. I've talked to Neil about it a lot. You know, when we did the watershed partnerships, we came up with the commands tax. I mean, we've come up with ways to do that. But it's important that this commission, and maybe you can hold some workshops or bring some people in, just a way to kind of have people understand. Because you talk about money and water people people freak out you know the counties don't want to deal with it they don't want to raise their rates but we need to find a way that we could fund the public trust because that's our responsibility that's kind of some suggestions i might have observations of how we've been very productive i want to thank you all i'm not going away i'm actually chair of the malama hunua a public charter school foundation you know we're raising money to build our school it's based on the values of ocean navigation the kids actually we have a sublease from the LNR. The kids are unbelievable. I mean, that is the next generation of leadership. And so I'm really dedicated to try to build that school. And it happens to be in Waimanalo. So I might be asking you guys for donations at some time, but it's been a pleasure, you know, and I was the DOFA, you know, and this was maybe when we were starting the East Maui Partnership, and that was when Waihole was just going, and I was going, God, these commissioners, they're fighting over this drop in the bucket when we're dealing with all this source water stuff. I said, one of these days, I'm gonna be on that commission. And we have so many converts now and watershed protection i feel very comfortable especially with commissioner hannah's i don't need to like i don't need to spout off any time but it's been great thank you very much keep up the great work uh you're doing important and the water code is probably one of the most innovative and aspirational water legislations in the world it really is it's not it's a challenge to implement but you know i've worked all over the us and internationally and um when i asked the maui chair comparing california and hawaii he obviously doesn't know much about hawaii yet because we are so far ahead of what they're doing in California about regulatory structures and Indigenous rights. So it's been a pleasure. Thank you all for your work. Stay happy and healthy. Thank you. Before I know that Jonathan and Lucienne are also on Zoom and probably want to say something so go ahead jonathan aloha my kakou commissioner is my name for the record is jonathan rikiki shoyer and while i often appear in front of you as a testifier on behalf of dhhl or other entities this is just my personal testimony um just wanting to thank commissioner buck for his years of service and say from the perspective of somebody who's been observing this commission for almost three decades now that I just want to highlight three things which came out in in his very thoughtful closing remarks that I think really mark something very special and at times completely unique that commissioner buck has brought to this commission first is really the matter he last talked about he's always approached the commission with an understanding of how innovative and how unusual and how profound the water code is and he's really sort of um come with that understanding that it means a huge deal to walk into a role of having to try and implement and uphold that. That relates to my second thing that I wanted to highlight about his tremendous service is that I certainly have not always agreed with some of the decisions that he's made. But unlike some other people I've observed over three decades, there was never a question in my mind that first and foremost, he understood the duties of a trustee, which first is duties to be faithful to the trust corpus itself. I might have disagreed with a decision he reached, but it was always in trying to further what was best for the resource and best for the implementation of the code. And that really increased the amount of trust that this body has had over the time of his service. And finally, and this is also something he remarked on, his continual drumbeat about us needing to connect how we manage our forested watersheds and how we manage the water derived from them is an incredibly important message. And I think that as we slowly make progress on that over the next years and decades, his voice in the wilderness will be one that will continue to guide us and be seen as a guiding light in that process. So I'm just personally very, very grateful for your service and for your closing remarks. Thank you for the opportunity to offer these few comments. Aloha. Thank you, Jonathan. That was very well said. Thank you so much. Lucianne, I see you on the call as well. Indeed. Mahalo. And and ah thank you all thank you all for a long day thank you all for um the service that each of the members puts into this very important board but you know i i've known mike since back in the days of of dofar and uh uh you know we've had discussions about forestry issues and this and that because I I've been here watching these meetings for about 3 decades, too, and those of us who represent, you know, groups that are trying to be part of the kind of watchdog for the public trust always appreciate when there's a person who's willing to listen. And like Jonathan says, you don't always come to the same agreement. In the end, that is not the whole point. The point is, is that there is a respectful and engaged dialogue. And Mike just really has gone the extra mile in every facet of his service on the commission. And I have to say you you're closing words Mike. I agree a 100% with every thoughtful suggestion you brought up. are on the minds of all of us who have been watching our water policy evolve from you know the 1980s when it first kind of took form and all of these are important things um i i joined with jonathan connecting our watersheds and caring for the whole watersheds and involving the communities in that caring is one of the most important things that we can do if we really don't want to be fighting over less and less water in the future we need to envision a future when we as we grow water and that means cooperating with nature i also very very much appreciate your remarks about working with stakeholders to try to avoid contested cases being the only option. Now, obviously, you know, I've been party to many contested cases. Sometimes they are the best option because the story is just too full to tell through even, you know, meeting a few times. But even you look at Nava'eha and working towards some of these brokered settlement agreements, it saved everybody time. It is not perfect. We do need more enforcement of what's on paper so it doesn't become just a good looking decision on paper that on the ground where's the water. But the idea of bringing people together when possible to find common ground over a shared resource. I I think should be very, very high on the purview of the commission like this, and I applaud your efforts. I you know you've made many suggestions to that that um uh that type of resolution and um uh director Chang is really heading in that way as well your staff is heading in that way so just from the bottom of our hearts in our communities you know most people are not like me they're they're not like kind of retired you know, just dedicated to sign up to wait in line to testify for hours, but they do care to see some of these dreams come true and do many other wonderful things for our community. So God bless you and thank you for your service. Thank you, Lucienne. You are indeed a great representative of the community. Mahalo for signing up and being there. I'm going to gonna let kaleo say the final words but i'm gonna go around either staff or commission if you want to say something to mike as well aurora i didn't draft anything oh that's okay from the heart from the heart from pretty bad at impromptu speaking um but i i do appreciate the opportunity i had to get to know you on the permitted interaction group and also you know sort of the the eight blood junior member on the commission really watching you kind of be the tip of the spirit you know the first person to make a motion and to know, because I think I first interacted with you through when I was working in conservation, so I knew your name and you work in Forestry. And to understand how like the role you played in the watershed partnerships. And kind of this stitching together for me of forest and water and then to be able to work with you in the permitted interaction group. And oh my gosh, like the phone calls, the text messages, the Zoom calls, the meetings, I mean the energy with which you attended every single, I don't know how many hours long meetings and read, actually like read through the very long reports, you know, I think I was skimming and word searching, but you read through and followed everything with such a commitment and i think for me um i don't know it's really great to see that as a model of this is what public service is because i don't think the public really understands not everybody does it but i think you set i think a high bar at least for me personally and how much to research and investigate and to learn more about um you said you came from a family of lawyers and that's why at least for me personally, and how much to research and investigate and to learn more about. You said you came from a family of lawyers. That's why I became a forester. Yeah. And I started foreseeing, I'm thinking like, well, I need to understand more about law, but I really appreciate what I've been able to learn, certainly, especially working more closely on the creative. Your comments about interactions interactions some of those exchangers were really where we could not be so reactive in a meeting but really think hard and think creatively and think around some really complex issues and um yeah mahalo for those this points i haven't been in contested case really yet. So I'll be thinking about it. Don't worry. Don't worry. We'll give it a chance. Yeah. So yeah. I'll holler for that. And we'll see you around in the educational sphere. There you go. Hey, for our legal assistant, we do have a mediation process that's in our rules, but the commissioners are not allowed to participate it's an outside person and we we still are not connected to that so maybe there's something you can look at we are looking joanna do you want to say um just a short one i thank you all so for all the hard work that we've put in on the commission, these eight years and plus. We appreciate everything that you've done for the water and the big picture of water, not just one focus of quantity. So yes, there is the overlap between quantity and quality, and we do need to work together. So thank you for also being on the pig, sorry, the interaction group, and providing the input that we needed for the red hill situation and thank you for what you do you've been in the spotlight last couple of years i know that's really easy wayne did you want to say anything right thanks mike i think one of the signature characteristics of the effective organization is a composition of its members, in your perspective has filled a very important segment of how we approach issues and how we resolve that. So, you know, again, thank you, Mike. And unfortunately, our first interaction was I replaced you on your seat. So I apologize for that. No, and I looked at your resume, because obviously I wasn't reappointed. I did have like a three month gap. I said, no, no, he's okay. Anyway, Mike, thank you very much for being you. And thank you very much for, I guess, helping me see a far broader perspective of what needs to be encompassed in managing and ensuring that we have a sustainable water supply that provides for a healthy community in terms of growth so again mike thank you very much yeah uh my carpets have crossed many times uh prior to being on the Water Commission and during these last seven years of overlap. And I have no doubt they'll cross again in the future. And there are four things that I've really come to appreciate in this term of service is you really love Hawaii and your Ola Ha'aina factor metric is really up there and we really appreciate that and you're courageous about it you put it on the line and you fight for it so uh that's awesome uh you you you show up you know uh you have a you bring a lot to the table when you do uh you are prepared and you engage and you're gonna take the time to take're going to take a seat on this table you know be there be present and and be ready and and do your job so uh you've done really well and set a model and example for all of us as you come here um you don't know a lot but yet you're very respectful of everybody else it's a. And as Wayne has said, you recognize that these decisions have to balance a lot of interests you have, you have some others have other perspectives, and those focus great sense of respect for your peers and for the testifiers and the diverse constituencies out there that need to be served. So appreciate that. And finally, you made a special effort to be transparent. And you kept those humongous decisions, you know, East Maui and Nau'eha and so forth. You know, you were the one who fought for executive summaries. So the public really needs to not get mired in all the details or just the one who fought for executive summaries. So the public really needs to not get mired in all the details or just the one line item that affects them and so forth. They need to see the big picture. And I think it really helps people. It creates the common ground, the higher, higher sense of vision and value. It helps bring people together. So it it's it's considerate of them to say they should they need to know but it's also unifying for those that can share this and i think that's helped us a lot and appreciate that so uh i hope part of your future is not just building a wonderful school uh but but also uh maybe playing a little music oh Oh, yeah. I'll let you. Thank you so much. I'm going to let Kaleo have the last words. It's both have come to know each other well. All I can say is from me, I've always, I think it's, what I appreciate is sort of this full circle, being part of the, you never leave the LNR. I mean, I say that because I can speak that firsthand. And it is a very different perspective to sit on this side of the table versus that side of the table. Because we do have this awesome kuleana that the decisions we make have broad implications far beyond us and our generation but generations to come. And I have just appreciated watching you afar sitting on here, but as well as when you were with DLNR, water and land are inseparable. And sitting here, we have the ability to always ensure that we are taking into consideration all of that and how intertwined and interconnected and that we as decision makers cannot separate that, but ensure that we are considering all of those. And I always talk to the staff about staying in our lane, but I think as a decision maker, we have to take the much broader view, and I've appreciated the lens upon which you have brought to the Water Commission just that the broader kuleana of recognizing again that our decisions have broad implications but that it is um it is a very heavy responsibility and you have worn that well and have accepted that with such honor and privilege and so it likewise it has been a privilege for me to share this time with you together as short of that as it is but we're going to probably see you on that side of the table you know yeah who knows maybe as a hearing officer or as a i mean you can help to you can help to to correct this broken contested case hearing process but um like neil our pals will cross again so thank you very much yeah i mean i'm on behalf of the staff, you've always been really respectful of the team and super supportive. And it's been really great to work with you for four and a half years of your tenure. I really just, I mean, everybody's kind of touched on your great attributes and the work that you've done on the space that you've held and you've held it well. But I really just appreciated like your storytelling in space and kind of connecting people through this scene versus kind of using the scene from a place of power you really found a way to um make this of people's you know the community and space and and have been a staunch advocate for the public trust um but also holding ourselves as trusted accountable um and to look and innovate and and continue to push push that flow so i've appreciated that and I've learned a lot from you. And yeah, it's the beginning of another story. So good luck and we will miss you. We will miss you on this spot. I wish you'd replace me with someone who has a little bit of knowledge. You know, I unfortunately have zero clout in that process. And so, you know, we look forward to you know talking to me. Commission again on his expertise in this space and it really helps build the capacity of our staff um and our agency um and and i think we do a lot so little um and and and and build that trust over time yeah with community yeah i think it'd be really he'll be really interesting just the history of the water code you, what happened between 78 and 81, and how was this established, all the different compromises and things to make it, because people are going to go after the water code, I think, eventually. Because let's say in Lahaina, we made some pretty big decisions that pissed some people off. They were not ready. And yet, I don't think people realize what the water code was and i think over the last eight years we're really implementing it we've had an opportunity that other commissioners haven't to really implement it for the first time over large areas and so i i think people are now just like thinking about it and what it means and uh yeah so i i think he'll he'll bring an incredibly useful perspective because he was there during that time. I wasn't, you know, between 78 and 81 I was here, but I wasn't part of any of that process. But I don't know anyone's really kind of documented that, you know, all the push pull and the whole room issues at home and how did they actually come up with that, because I think eventually someone needs to tell that story, because it is a unique story. He wrote a book. yeah but. it's a tough read. He will definitely add a different dynamic to this commission yeah yeah we're gonna have to put a special seat yeah in the way and the family no i undoubtedly um big shoes to fill you bring a very different perspective than he does but you know i think that is as you say that is the wonderful value i mean we were all here when we had land boards and water commissions that were very different composition that didn't necessarily reflect this kind of wealth of expertise and community so yeah we've come a long way. One other suggestion I forgot, that because of Zoom, there should be at least like once every quarter that the commissioners could come together. So you actually can be in the same room because it's so much easier to go on Zoom. We all know that and we prefer that mostly, but especially when they buy, it's really important for people to sit face to face i think more people have been trying to make an effort so yeah but thank you for bringing creating the opportunity for everybody to be here today yeah don't do it again all right with that being said the commission meeting is closed.