 Hello, my name is I don't see Kathy. Hello, my cock hole. My name is Don Chang. The governor's nominee is chair of the Board of Man and Natural Resource, and the chair of the Water Commission. Good morning. This is the March 21st, 2023 meeting of the Commission on Water Resource Management. It is, and I apologize for being late, 9, 10 a.m. We are holding this meeting as a hybrid meeting. Some of us are in person, Mike Buck and myself, at the Kalanemoku Building Boardroom in Honolulu, and we are also holding this meeting remotely via Zoom and can be watched live on YouTube. For those here to testify in Zoom, we will let you into the meeting when we will be hearing the item you wish to testify on. Please remember to turn off your YouTube when you are in the main Zoom meeting room or we will get an echo. When you enter, please be sure to keep your camera off and microphone muted until the commission calls on you for public testimony. We ask that members of the public testifying on agenda items limit your testimony to three minutes so that we can get to everyone. Please be mindful of everyone here and limit to three minutes as well. And please remember not to use a chat for any comments, because that presents a sunshine issue. People may also testify via telephone at the number posted online. Please let our commission secretary know your name and what agenda item you wish to testify on so we can call you for that item you can email your testimony via email nadine.h.pomeroy hawaii.gov or dlnr.seaworm hawaii.gov for all meeting participants i would like to stress the importance of speaking slowly clearly and directly for those of us who oh we don't have them oh we have a microphone before speaking please state your name and identify yourself for the record we wish to request a contested case hearing. If such a request is made before the Commission's decision, then the Commission will consider the request first before considering the merits of the item before it. A person who wants a contested case may also wait until the commission decides the issue then request a contested case hearing after the decision it is up to you any request must be made orally by the end of the meeting and followed up in writing within 10 days if no request for contested case is made the commission will make a decision the department will treat the decision as final and proceed accordingly and the commission may go into executive session i pursue the 92-5 parent a parent for hawaii revised statutes in order to consult with the attorney on questions and issues pertaining to the commission's powers, duties, privileges, immunities, and liabilities. I'd like to take a roll call now of the commissioners. Please state your name, and if you are participating remotely, please state whether there's anyone in the room with you I'll first go through the members in the boardroom uh yes um Michael Buck here in person and Don Shang chair um next I'll go um Neil Hannis if you can identify yourself Aloha Neilis. I'm in my office by myself. Dr. Aurora Kagawa Viviani. I'm in my office by myself. Thank you. Wayne Katayama. Good morning, Wayne Katayama. I'm here in my office at home by myself. Very good. Paul Meyer. Good morning, Chair. This is Paul Meyer. I'm at home in my office and all alone. Do I have Kathy Hull? Joanna Seto for the Department of Health, delegated commissioner this time. And I am in my office by myself. You're in my office. myself very good thank you so much does someone have their um speaker on all right so i'd like to just introduce staff that are present as well I have Deputy Kaleo Manuel, Seaworm. I also have our Board Secretary, Nadine Pomeroy, and Deputy Attorney General, Cindy Young. I'm just gonna go over a few agenda item protocols. Occasionally we will do a move up item and take it out of order. We will hear items generally in the following order as they were presented on the agenda, unless there has been a request for an item to be moved up. Ms. Pomeroy, has there been any agenda items that have been redrawn or asked to be moved up on the agenda? Just B2, Chair, we can move B2 to the end of the agenda. So not to break up the commission meeting and flow, and we can take action if that's possible. Very good. So a request has been made by Deputy Kahlil Manuel to take out of order item B2. Do I have anyany all in favor do we approve do we need to put don't need to okay i just want to be very clear so for those of you that may be on the maybe in zoom we're going to take item b2 out of order and it will be at the end of the agenda. It's executive session as well. Yeah. No problem. Thank you. C1 is off right now. C... Sorry, that was Kapolei. Can you please unmute your... I'll help you out. All right. Mahalo. I'll just remind everybody again, if you could please mute yourself while you're in the waiting room, and we'll try to call you as quickly as possible. The first item on the agenda is agenda. Item A approval of the minutes of January 24th, 2023. Do I have any corrections? Well, first of all, do I have any written testimony on the minutes, Ms. Tomlin? Any members of the public who want to testify on our minutes? We're seeing no one commissioners are there any Corrections or comments to the minutes I was given oh go ahead please chair um yes I'd like to make a motion to amend the minutes with minor edits. Very good, and what are those edits? Page 14. Insert premise before plumbing. Sorry, I don't have the actual line locations. Mediation would be remediation. All right. This is in Mr mr lopez's um presentation i'm sorry and i also have on page 15 paragraph one third to the last line collect c-o-l-l-e-t should be collect page 18 paragraph two the last line removing hanging flows bracket and i think are there any other all right thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you thank you So, Ms. Palmer, could you do a roll call vote, please? Commissioner Buck? Aye. Commissioner Settem? Aye. Commissioner Hannes? Aye. Commissioner Kagawa-Liviani? Aye. Commissioner Katayama? Aye. Commissioner Meyer? Aye. Chair Chang? Chair Chang. Aye. Thank you very much. The motion has been unanimously approved. Thank you very much. The next item on the agenda is a non-action item. It's for an informational briefing, and this is on item B1 it is on the briefing on the adoption of the maui island water use and development plan update chair let's make sure we get everybody in the room for b1 okay testifiers and presenters b1 yes Okay, we're good. All right. Chair, Jeremy Kimura with the planning office will be doing the presentation today. Okay, Mr. Kimura, Jeremy Kimura. Seaworm Planning Branch and here to give a presentation today on our proposed approach for adoption of the Maui Island Water Use and Development Plan update. So let me just share my presentation here. Okay, can everybody see that? Yeah, it looks like I can see it over there. Okay, so like I said, I'm going to talk about our approach on about the Maui Island Water Use Development Plan. Before I begin, I also want to mention that joining me today to answer questions after and provide some testimony is Eva Blumenstein from the Maui Department of Water Supply Planning Office, who did the majority of the work preparing this document, as well as the honorable Councilman Shane Sinensi, who also did a lot of work taking this document through the Council adoption process. So with that so just a little bit of a quick outline just give you a quick background on the hawaii water plan and the water use development plan a little bit of a history on the update of this current maui island water use and development plan some of the issues that were raised through the public hearing process and then talk about staff's analysis of the document and our recommendations, as well as next steps. So for those watching on Zoom or tuning in today on YouTube, you can find links here. This presentation will be made available online after this, and you can click on these links to see information about the Hawaii water plan the framework which is the guidance document for preparing each of the Hawaii water plant components as well as a link to the draft or the Maui Island water use development plan that was adopted by the county as well as the draft staff submittal which in there I should point out you commissioners got that at the meeting but has the testimony that we received on the uh adoption for this plan so really quickly uh as many of you know the hawaii water plan is something that's required in the state water code uh really to to plan for our water future right uh so here it is laid out in the code requiring this program called the hawaii water plan which is actually made up of many documents. And you can see it here, starting going from left to right. We have the Water Resource Protection Plan and the Water Quality Plan prepared by us, the Commission, the Water Resource Protection Plan, and the Department of Health as co-stewards of water resources, according to the code, really saying what's the quality and quantity of our freshwater resources, how do we protect it, right? Our management toolbox, the policies that we use for protection of water resources in the state. Moving to the right, we have our state needs, the State Water Projects Plan, which is prepared by our engineering division, which lays out things like what do we need, what are the current and future needs for hospitals schools airports the department hawaiian homeland and then you have the agriculture water use and development plan which department of ag does which really serves as a long-range cip plan for our legacy or historic irrigation systems as well as coming up with some general estimates of agriculture water use demand right i think you've heard the number 3800 gallons per acre per day is something that diversified agriculture will need for water as you plan for it and all that comes together really at the county water use and development plans which is what we'll be talking about today for maui where the county land use plans are taken and applied uh looked at uh what the water duty is right so what's the land use plans are taken and applied, looked at what the water duty is, right? So what's the land use impact? What's the impact on water based on our land use policies? And this is the Hawaii Water Plan and the program in general. So the county water use and development plans, I'm sorry, the county land use plans really aren't called out as a specific component of the Hawaii Water Plan, but it's an integral part for preparing the county water use and development plan and so just really quickly in the code what does the water use development plan what should be in there according to the law right so it's prepared by each of the counties it should be adopted by ordinance it needs to be consistent with the land use plans and policies and really setting forth like I said at the allocation of water to land use through the development of and really setting forth, like I said, the allocation of water to land use through the development of policies, coming up with strategies, how you're gonna meet those water demands and water uses that are laid out, and as well as there should be some kind of periodic update to the plan. And this is, there are additional requirements as well in the rules, as well as some guidance through what's called the Hawaii Water Plan Framework, which actually provides additional policy guidance that the Hawaii Water Plan Preparers use to put together these water use and development plans and other Hawaii Water Plan components. So let's just talk really briefly about the Maui Island Water Use Development Plan. It was began in 2016. In the draft submitter, you'll see that 2012 was when the commission adopted and updated project description. 2016, the project began. Maui Department of Water Supply began this effort in-house. In 2018, they submitted the plan to their board of water supply, the Maui Board of Water Supply, and then the plan with comments was sent to the Maui County Council in 2019. And through their adoption process and through the ordinance setting process, they added the plan, they added an addendum, which included some updated information, as as uh conducted additional outreach to the community and council member sinensi uh will probably mention some of that what he did and can talk more uh to the additional outreach that was done as they conducted their uh adoption process at the county council and in 2022 the plan was adopted by ordinance uh by the council and then the plan was submitted to the commission us for adoption and we subsequently held a public hearing in September on the plan to receive comments on the document before bringing it to you folks for adoption. So just again, really quickly, eight kind of targeted stakeholder meetings, sort of policy board presentations, hearings at the board of water supply and county council committee meetings. And Eva can talk more about this, if there are questions about their process in preparing the plan on this. So the commission went ahead and after receiving documents, held a public hearing on it. And that was held in September at the Kihei Community Center. According to our sign-up, about 33 individuals attended. As a result, we received about 53 total number of testimonies written and oral at the hearing. And the majority of the testifiers opposed the plan. So what I want to talk to you next is sort of the testifiers oppose the plan so what i want to talk to you next is sort of the issues that were brought up uh by the public through our public hearing process about this plan uh and why why it was a why they felt it shouldn't be adopted by the commission so there are roughly 10 issues that are brought up and i'm kind of summarizing them here and you can look into the testimony of for specific issues that are brought up and I'm kind of summarizing them here and you can look into the testimony for specific issues that are brought up with this sort of like the summary of the things that we heard right so one was that the plan was difficult to read. People felt they should, it should be prepared by planning consultant. A second is that the plan relied on old data, rather, it should be used and updated data should be used um to develop it um the testifiers had questions about what's the impact of the community water authorities when we held this public hearing it was prior to the general election and still this community water authority uh measure that was on the ballot at Maui County did not uh wasn't approved yet but it has been subsequently uh next there were questions about elements of this Haiku Pa'i'a community plan needed to be incorporated into the document. And then related to that, there's no information about how this upcountry water meter lists would be resolved. Again, related to Haiku is that it's identified as a major source of the water for the island's population, but little was known about the water, as little is known about the aquifer um testifiers also had issues with uh how water should be used right no water should go to hotels and commercial uses and climate change impacts weren't considered as well as water conservation targets were not aggressive enough and as well as um finally how is the lahaina water management area designation that the commission did going to impact the findings in the wires in the development plan and before i go on i just want to say um uh give a big thank you to the people who've spent the time to come out to the public hearing on an evening and give their testimony and write to us and really appreciated the issues that they raised today. And so next, I'm going to go through sort of our staff response and our analysis to each of these issues that are brought up. So the first one about, you know, the plan being difficult to read and should be prepared by a planning consultant. You know, this is a criticism, a fair criticism that all the Hawaii water plan components have, even us, as we prepare the document, I think part of it is when you prepare a document as complex as these water plans yourself, it's really something that's within your purview and expertise and you forget that any public document should be accessible to any level of reader right regardless of their background um and so the commission we're guilty of this as well but really the the method of preparation for the water use development plan is not something that's outlined as a requirement in the code or the rules or the framework as well as it's it's a resource issue some counties might not have the full resources to really engage a consultant for all the development. Another thing is, as the document went through its preparation and the Council took a look at it, there was additional information that got added. And so you see in this executive summary is about average double what the other water use and development plans are are are are on average. So it's like double the length of what you usually see in the executive summary. The next issue was, you know, I mentioned the old data, right? So plan has old data, it should be updated based on current data and availability. And, you know, the response to this is if you look at the framework, which is the guidance document for preparing these water use and development plans, it recommends what's called a living document approach. This is a term that's thrown around a lot. But really, the idea is the document is constantly evolving and being updated. Because as soon as you begin updating the plan, the data is old. And that's why another thing is recommended is developing a range of projections of water use and growth. A lot of it's based on population projections. Obviously we know in 2020, there was a big thing that happened that water use and population demographic changes happened across the state and the world really. But that's why you have a range, right? And the plan comes up with sort of a most likely scenario, but you still have a range in there. So you can plan for those uncertainties. When the addenda was added to the document But you still have a range in there, so you can plan for those uncertainties. When the addenda was added to the document through the council review process, the new sustainable yield projections were put in, which the Commission, after when this plan was originally started in 2016, in 2019, the Commission adopted new sustainable yields. And so those are incorporated into this update or this agenda um as you know mahipono became came into existence in central maui so those plans are put in there as well as updated information about our interim industry flow standards with which the commission is working um really diligently to uh adopt throughout the state um but i i will say in terms of this old data one of the things that we will work on with the preparers as well as the county, including the county, is to incorporate these climate change studies that we're doing now with the U.S. Geological Survey that looks at changes to our availability of groundwater based on mid-century and end of century climate change projections so we will be working with the preparers to make sure that is incorporated the next thing is this question about how are the community water authorities um should they be considered you know what what impact are they going to have on the planning and the plan and you know this is a new thing like I said in November was the election where this measure was adopted by the county uh voters in the county and we as well do not know the full details of what the community water authority is uh perhaps councilman cincinnati can can speak a little bit more to that um but we want to make sure that there is the nexus to that is identified and the role of this entity is identified in the next update probably in the you see development plan i think it's going to take a while for the county to set these water authorities up and what their purview is and really understand uh and so the commission can understand really how they best interact with us but they will be part of the next water use and development update um next one is this question about these elements the haiku community plan put your community plan, Pa'ia community plan were not incorporated in the need to be. If you look at the strategies in section 15 and 16 policies from the 1995 plan were incorporated in there. One of the big things is that no groundwater, this is stated in the plan, that no groundwater would be transported out of the region before adequate water is ensured for planned growth in the Haiku Pa'ia community. And so you see that in there. However, if you look at this 1995 was when the plan was adopted. So we'd be interested to see if there's an effort ongoing at the county to update this community plan from 1995, right, with more new information. Next one is like about the upcountry water meter list. And section 15 in the plan proposes some alternative options, assessing alternative options to explore a new source, really which is really what's needed to resolve this upcountry meter list, folks on the list. But one of the things commission is committed to doing is working with the water department. This is related to the next three issues as well, but the next two issues, but working with the water department to look at what data do the water department need, what data, what hydrologic data is needed to determine that sources can be developed in a sustainable manner. So staff will be working with the water department on that as well as you know, this is related to this next one. There are there are questions right from the community about the haiku aquifer, you know, as its sustainability, can it sustain what's projected for growth and use for the area. So as as many of you know, we determined the sustainable yield or the sustainable limit of groundwater development, of groundwater use for the aquifers through the Water Research Protection Plant Update, which will obviously be informed, as I mentioned, by the climate change studies that we're doing with the US Geological Survey. Right now that's about to be published, but that being said, again, we'll work with the US geological survey right now that's about to be published but um that being said you know this we again will work with the bar department staff to identify sort of data gaps in the data what do they need to move forward comfortably and and confidently on on developing new source to to really um to really resolve this upcountry meter list uh and you know we're we're committing to report back to the commission in a year on sort of those findings, what the data gaps are. Maybe there's some studies that we need to start, additional data that we need to collect for the area to get a better idea of the sustainability. Next one is there's certain types of water use should not be allowed, right? Such as hotels and commercial use. And I think we've seen this in a lot of the other water use development plan updates in the process. And it's this issue of the value of how water should be used, right? It comes up, like people are saying, like, we need to do a better job at looking at at prioritizing our uses right of water especially among the public trust uses um but currently the water use development plan as stated in the code needs to be consistent with the county land use plan so if there are uh county land uses such as hotel and commercial uses um the water use development plan must be consistent with that how is it going to meet those uh that are developed through these county land uses, county land use plans or general plan updates? That being said, we are working with the county and other partners in places like West Maui to talk about how we're going to expand our one, non-potable needs. So at least we can start getting some of these non-potable commercial needs off sort of the portable portable aquifer needs so that's something staff is currently working on with the county climate change impacts are not considered again like i mentioned the water use development plan looks at a range of scenarios right because you know we don't know right about how climate is going to change uh and and affect resources. You know, you look at, there's climate change is identified as a priority action, which includes things like vulnerability assessments for the water department in sections 9, 10, 11, and 12. Like I said, there's this USGS groundwater recharge study that we're looking at that's going to look at how aquifer groundwater recharge is going to change in the mid-century, which is 2040, as well as end of century 2099. And something, as I mentioned, I apologize, there's a lot of information, but something we talked about before, which is this framework update, this guidance that we're developing for the Hawaii water plan components, such as the water use development plan. One of the value statements that came out in developing when you plan for our water resources in these water plans going forward is kilo, right? That was really outlined to us as a guiding value. So that's going to be something that's going to be in these documents going forward. So learning from the past and those observations to create a better future. Water conservations are not aggressive. Targets are not aggressive enough. In the plan they talk about per capita water conservation targets. Again, it's not something targets are not required by the code or the framework or the rules we ask that water conservation be looked at as a strategy really. Instead of developing new source, can you get some savings in water conservation so you don't have the county to look at sort of the plan talks about what we call per capita demand, which is really water and use demand, right? So people, you know, brushing their teeth in shorter periods, taking shorter showers, using, you know, changing their water fixtures. These are all per capita water conservation demand strategies. But something that all the counties currently do is called a water system audit and that looks at the supply side conservation measures and these are things like, you know, can you fix leaks in your pipes, can you improve your delivery of the water into the system so that you're through our water audit so we are committed to working with the county to look at these supply side um efficiencies that could be had by improving their water system based on their water audit recommendations we think there might be potentially about one or two mgd of water that could be saved annually just by looking at it and improving the data that they use to come to that conclusion so that's's something staff is committed to doing as well as a result of this effort. Next thing is then really the last issue is like, how will this Lahaina water management area designation affect the water use development findings? So this was something that was also fairly new and happened as this plan was being finalized and after that it was developed. And I'll just mention that as all you commissioners probably know you know these water use permits any new water use permits will be subject to commission decision right and in our commission public meetings um and those decisions will really be informed by the information in the maui island water use development plan so as staff is developing these uh staff submittals to you and recommendations. The water use development plan, the strategies that are identified in there, and sort of the identification of where water needs to go based on their land uses will be part of that analysis as staff is submitting these new water use permits to you for decision. So, and just finally, and you know, I'm not gonna go through all of this cause I've talked quite a bit already and I apologize, but you know, we looked at the consistency with the code and the framework. And if you look in the draft staff submitter, we have a table where we look at each of the requirements of the code and the rules and framework and where they've been met. And we found that they've been met and we found that they've been met in in this document um so as the analysis says here um we conclude that all the state water code requirements and requirements of the framework um have been met by the by this update um and later later slides in this in this presentation show show some of that as well as as i mentioned the table in the in the submittal so really what are our next steps um depending on the discussion today and what what the knowledge that you folks as commissioners share with us um we'll be looking to take this to adoption at possibly the next meeting the april meeting um again here's a link for folks listening in to the draft submittal this when this when a pdf of this presentation is put online on the commission's website you can click on this and look at the staff submittal as well as read the testimony that was included that was submitted to us as part of the public hearing process um again references here for everything So folks can click on this presentation to get references to all these things that are mentioned in today's plan. And with that, I just want to thank all of you for your time, and I will stop sharing. And I'll mention that, again, that Ivo Blumenstein from Maui Department of Water Supply is here to answer questions, as well as the Honorable Councilman Shaneainson Ensi as well to provide some testimony. Thank you. Maybe if I just want to go and offer the councilman, maybe if you'd like to say a few words about the process, the council process update and his thoughts on the update. Thank you, Council. I appreciate that. Council Member Cianci, would you like to provide us an overview of the community engagement process? Yes, Mahalo and Mahalo, Mr. Kimura. Aloha and good morning commission members i'm shane senancy the maui county council member and the former chair of the agriculture and public trust committee which reviewed and approved the water use and development plan before you today the department of water supply spent considerable time creating this plan, and I wanted to focus on the review process and the community work that went into this plan. We put forth considerable time and effort to review and add to the plan over the last seven years, which played an important role in shaping it into the document that you're reviewing today. During my term as chair, held 15 ag and public trust committee meetings on the plan in previous years several other committees also worked on the plan including the water and infrastructure committee the water infrastructure and transportation committee and the environmental agriculture and cultural preservation committees in my committee council members went over each chapter of the document in each aquifer sector area. As part of our review, we added 49 new strategies and expanded five existing policies. We incorporated the addendum section throughout the corresponding areas of the document and into the document's main body. We added information on Native Hawaiian water and cultural rights, including information on the public trust doctrine, riparian rights, kuleana rights, konohiki rights, and the duties of state agencies to protect native Hawaiian traditional and customary rights which were included in the kapaa kai analysis sections we wrote a new section entitled historical and cultural context of the regulatory system according to input from the ahamoku councils we also added the consent decree and the board of water supply temporary investigative report regarding the feasibility of purchasing and maintaining the EMI water delivery system to the appendices. I'm particularly proud of our work with the local Maui Island Ajamoku Councils to ensure that water as a cultural resource is properly considered and addressed my staff and i met with the local councils to integrate native hawaiian water resource management history strategies and generational knowledge into the plan i want to note that their input doesn't mean that they support the plan, they remain neutral, and that not all of their recommended strategies were adopted by the council. Specifically, the West Maui Council asked for a strategy prohibiting water system connectivity to the council. The council did not adopt that. The Ahamoku Council in the Ko'olau area also did not support the Haiku Well Strategy. However, most of the local council's recommendations were adopted. In part one of the plan, we added a section on Kanawai, a history of Hawaiian water law. And for each area, the council stress ecosystem management and returning water to the system. As a result, strategies were adopted for requiring the county to advocate for stream connectivity and color cultivation, kuleana and traditional rights. A strategy requiring the Department of Water Supply to use generational and traditional knowledge to complement scientific data. Strategies were adopted directing the Department of Water Supply and County Council to consult with local Native Hawaiians when making decisions. The plan now requires that a Native Hawaiian advisory group be established and that the Department of Water Supply employees receive training on Hawaiian resource management and Hawaiian rights. The Island Ahamoku Councils and the general communities also cited a lack of enforcement by Sea Worm on stream IIFS and they hope you can work more with local volunteers for stream monitoring. Both the Council and the general community asked for strategies to limit extravagant hotel water use and penalize water waste behaviors. And we added strategies including policies directing the council to establish a new tiered rate structure and a separate hotel category that promotes water conservation. They asked that we add environmental protection strategies for dry land native forests, wetland areas, aquifer recharge areas, groundwater and policies directing the council to revise county laws to promote water catchment gray water use efficient landscaping and building requirements and water conservation for golf courses resorts and public facilities local area councils made some area specific comments for the Ko'olau District, a strategy encourage home rule of water resources, specifically the EMI system, which was adopted. For Hana, a strategy establishing additional water priorities for kuleana users, cultural uses and affordable housing was adopted. For Haiku members did not support the Haiku well strategy, but that input did not result in any new strategies. In West Maui there was the request to adopt the strategy not to interconnect water systems across the different areas. But the committee members did not adopt that. So while there are still community members to feel that areas need to be worked on, I see the plan as a living document. The plan is required to be updated regularly to reflect our ever changing environment, persistent with drought conditions conditions water scarcity and new legislation also new state requirements including stream flow standards and inclusion of the newly created east molly water authority board our community went over the plan and members testified at each of the committee meetings there are concerns specifically about climate change and the need for the county to adopt more stringent water conservation goals the current goal is eight percent over the next 20 years and i know we should strive for more the plan also needs to include updated data as mr kimura had mentioned in the update i would like to see data presented in an easier to understand in layman's terms in ways that the public can easily understand the department of water supply may also want to hire a consultant for the update to make the plan easier for the public to use and i understand that other islands have also done this there is also a need for the update to include information on water authority ballot initiative that passed during our last election we are in the process of creating the east maui community water authority board it is our hope that having the county in control of public water resources can provide more resources to help satisfy the country water meterless applications. And finally, the haiku community strongly spoke up against the haiku aquifer as the main source of new county wells, and they felt that this strategy is unfair because their needs have not been met there was discussion in the committee about removing the haiku well strategy but not enough support was received to remove it and the major reason was that removing the haiku well strategy as a source of water would have created an imbalance in the plan's demand, causing the plan to become invalid. The new water director stated yesterday that a consultant has been hired to complete a feasibility study as mandated by the court consent decree. And so in closing, I would just like to leave the commission members with an understanding of all the work that was put into this document. It is a living document, much like the importance of Kauaiola. The work doesn't end today, but I do mahalo everyone who has shared their mana'o to get to this point. Mahalo. Oh, mahalo to you, Councilmember Sinansi. Clearly, there's been a lot of comprehensive outreach done on this and i appreciate the overview that you presented to the commission um do we have i i know there's um ifa blumenstein would you like to um to say anything if you with the water supply hello chair um commissioners yeah mahalo um yeah i really just want to follow council members and nc and the community and the commission staff that has spent so much time uh working diligently with the department uh private water purveyors and all a lot of work went into this plan. We had an original plan submitted in 2010 to the commission that was rejected. It was not really adequately addressing all the private purveyors. It wasn't based on hydrologic units. And we feel that the plan really now does, I mean, it's addressing these controversial issues that have been unresolved for 30 plus years. It doesn't come up with solution everything that it really tackles it. We knew, you know, starting the re reigniting the public outreach doing this effort back in 2,016 that there would be-offs and some difficult compromises so after 70 plus meetings you know we feel that the plan now meets the uh needs of the land use plans it has support from the broader community you know it's not going to be everything to everyone but it's a good tool we've been able to use it already on a county level to guide our capital improvement program and investing in what a resource protection. So regardless, you know, for the commission's purposes, we believe it meets the State water code and and beyond even the framework. But so far we are grateful for the work that went into this, and that we've been able to to apply this as a guide for on the county level so Mahalo for taking it up today thank you very much for that Saman and acknowledging the good work of the community engagement you know I will want to reiterate this is not a this is just an informational briefing but like the effort that's been done and described the water commission we are wanting to create platforms through our commission for good information and the public to to get informed as well as to participate so again thank you for all of the good work that's been done uh do i have anybody else i have i think i have gina lammer who's um with the council did you want to say anything sure i don't see her oh we don't all right thank you we're good so um commissioners do you have any questions of the presentation? Okay, I've got Mike Buck is raising his hand and then I have Commissioner Kagawa Viviani next. Jeremy, this is maybe for you, but any of the testifiers can jump in. Again, thank you all for the hard work you did. How does the plan address that the majority of the water delivery system on maui is controlled by private entities uh as well the diversions in the water delivery system how does this plan address that that issue um you know i'll let i'll let eva kind of mention talk a little bit more about that eva did you want to touch on it sure um i mean this is thank you for that question uh commissioner buck and uh it's definitely one of the main challenges specifically for maui because we have uh multiple private purveyors that are sometimes competing for the same resource and whatnot and we had to be really diligent developing this plan to make sure this is this is not the department's plan this is not our cip program but it's looking at all the needs of other purveyors um and there's only so many tools that can be used to implement strategies that are um that address the private water purveyors because obviously the county doesn't have jurisdiction of allocations to that extent. So some of the strategies, I can just give you a couple of examples. There's calls for more investment in water resource protection, investing in watershed management based on the type of end uses if you are a private purveyor using groundwater from a specific watershed you know we should see better investments matching investment for the water resource that you extract if there are strategies for optimizing alternative resources before using conventional groundwater surface water in an area. We want the planning department and the bodies that will improve land use entitlements to include that strategy as a condition of entitling a land use or approving a land use permit. So we've been working closely with the Maui County Planning Department to set that up. So in areas that are not designated, there's all these different tools, but it's always a challenge, whether that is for conservation, the large municipalities are better equipped to have well-funded conservation programs or source protection programs, and private purveyors benefit from that but other strategies such as regulating conservation measures in the future we're proposing conservation bill could apply to all water purveyors doesn't just have to be for county-owned system that's just a couple of examples thank you um doctor i have next up dr uh kagala viviani Just just a couple of examples. Thank you. Doctor, I have next step. Dr. Kagawa Viviani. Thanks, Jeremy,360 page document that didn't have applicable contents. because Maui is at this inflection point and as you emphasize community engagement is key you know the document itself doesn't invite participation it doesn't invite access and you know parts of the document maybe were overlooked because they were hard to find are there or can you develop a more accessible format of this document without having to go through all the consular approval you know just to make it more accessible and to allow for people to focus on the sections of the document that relate to them or search it because even the ipcc you know intergovernmental panel on climate change report which is a totally unwieldy beast you know, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report, which is a totally unwieldy beast, you know, has broken things down in a way to make it more accessible to. And so is that possible? Like, I can see some easy things, but I don't know if that's for Jeremy or for people or Council Members from NC, but is there a way to sort of keep the content there, but make it more accessible without having to go through Council processes. Yeah, i'll just mention from the commission side totally agree with you on making all these documents much more accessible. I think that's a big issue too in terms of transparency, you know, making things more accessible for everyone to read is really goes a long way towards transparency in terms of government. So the commission, we're committed to working with the department on creating a summary document that would be easy for people to look at. But yeah, so I'll leave it to Eva. Like I'm not sure in terms of time and resources, they're willing to expand on it but we're we're happy to work on that with the county eva did you want to respond thank you um thank you commissioner um yeah i mean this is something we heard uh throughout the um actually not until the plan went out for board the draft plan that was submitted to the board and went out to board hearings and you know as the plan went through county council it grew and it grew so you know even it started as a fairly large quantity and it grew another couple hundred pages so it's an unwieldy document and the original format um was never set up for uh easy access for for the public so at this point in time when it's been passed as courtments um i agree with jeremy maybe we would like to have uh something that's more a brief summary for general consumption and that document can be more quickly updated. We have, there is in the plan a matrix showing sort of an implementation matrix of what kind of quantitative and qualitative criteria we should look at over the implementation of this plan because obviously there's all these different strategies that will translate into projects to be scoped out, where there's more opportunities for community input, whatever that is, you know, environmental assessments, well construction permits, conservation bills, et cetera. So that sort of like a smaller user-friendly public use document we would like to have that would just be quicker update because we know there's not realistic update and what is wrong in five years, nobody has done that right. So, as long as this is the format of the framework. say water code i mean it's going to take this long you're going to have some outdated information in the plan but we would definitely like to have a brief summary document to have for more immediate use for the public i wanted to clarify i don't think a summary document would be great but even just the table of contents isn't like hyperlinked to sections so you have to scroll down like i mean that that doesn't require even any subs that I mean I could have an undergrad kind of do that in for the day so like is that something that could be done expediently and um and just as a step and then I guess as a follow-up like for the um update um is is the idea that this is a living document that there will be version B, or 2 point 0 in 5 years, because people are going to refer to right we're going to refer to the plan so if it's a moving a moving piece like when does, how are you going to control versioning yes that's what i mentioned the implementation matrix similar to the community and the land use plans uh you know you don't update the community plan version abc until you actually update the whole plan the policies are intended to be long term um and as you know what what it use demand changes more quickly than that so the implementation matrix will be the tool to follow um lead agencies funding other projects and whatnot um but but that could also have more of a summary that's easier used and applied by the public that would follow uh maybe be attached to capital improvement program uh proposals or you know whatever the projects that we're scoping out. All right, quick question. What page is the implementation matrix on? I word searched and could not find anything matching implementation matrix. Jeremy? Sorry, I'm checking. Eva, do you know off the top of your head? I'm looking in the index. Okay, this is a sign, this is a sign right here about it. So this speaks well to the point that was just made. Well taken, Jeremy. That's the um but yes excellent point okay as as eva you're trying to find it um aurora do you have any other questions okay thank you aurora do you have any other questions okay thank you very much do you have any other commissioners? Wayne Katayama? Yes, please go ahead. Thank you, Jeremy. Great presentation. Just to help me put things in context, four other key elements providing input to the county plan are state plans. What is the currency or the how current are these plans? Like the water quality plan, the resource protection plan, the AG water plan? Or does the county need to sort of update that on their own? Or how does the integration of that database work as a county goes through their water development plan? Yeah, good question. They're all sort of moving targets in a way. So I'll just say the Water Resource Protection Plan, which we've done, was updated last in 2019. The water quality plan as well, Joanna can confirm this, but 2019 as well, which so water resource protection plan is the big one since it has the sustainable yield numbers, right? That's what the counties need to use to plan for for the development, as well as policies on industry flow standard setting, things like that. The ag water use development plan has been a difficult one in the sense that there's been several updates i think uh i think you might have been here when the county their uh the department of ag did their last update to us and there's a lot of pushback on this recent update to the plan so it's sort of in development right now and where we've sent them comments on how they can improve it, put more information in, but the latest version of that plan is really from 2012, I believe, so kind of old. So really the only number that's being used by the water plant preparers right now is that estimation of diversified agriculture water use right so there's 3 800 gallons per acre per day which is something that was in the last adopted ag water use development plan that's what people are using to get an estimation of egg zone lands you know um or ag entitlements what the water duty could be right for those places the state water projects plan recently just completed the uh i believe in 2020 with the last statewide update for all state projects across the state and then previous to that in 2019 i believe uh we had the uh just for department of hawaiian homelands an update was done so those projections went into the uh i believe they're used in in the different plans uh one of the big things that came out of the state water projects plan update was we got an idea of what the uh reservations should be for dhh on that's what we're using to set the reservations for the state good um so those that's that's kind of the currency of it but as i said you know they're all sort of moving targets the big one i think is the ag water use and development plan needs to be updated and we're working with the department of ag um as you know they have new leadership now so we're trying to work with that team to make sure that time gets updated because we do see it as a critical component for water planning good thanks thank you jeremy thank you thank you wayne oh neil go ahead unmute yourself thank you thank you chair and thank you uh to the presenters uh jeremy on this issue of ag water just clarify uh my memory if you will haven't we been using 2500 gallons per acre per day in most of our agricultural allocations uh you know i i can't maybe kaleo can can speak to that, but the planning number that that has been adopted is is 38. But in many cases, some people might ask for less or I think like because that's kind of an old. number that was developed kind of a while ago, I believe, staff is using things like our irrigation estimation model to get a better idea of what demand is for the specific geographic area. I think that's resulted in lower per capita recommendations from staff, but Kaleo, I'm going to speak more to that. Yeah, the 2,500 gallon per acre per day comes from the wild-lived water case, and it's been kind of what we've used as a conservative number. but in the Ag Water Use Development Plan it is closer to what Jeremy said. And then what we're also using is IW Reds, which is a tool we partnered with Lupono to develop to estimate actual site-specific agricultural irrigation demands based on type of irrigation, you know, evapotranspiration, all of that soil moisture is all factored into it. So it gets us more down to the parcel specific estimates. And all of those are presented to the commission in its decision-making. Ultimately the commission has kind of leaned more towards the conservative number of 2,500 gallons break up a day in order to encourage conservation. So those, again, as Jeremy talked about, we're looking at ranges and not necessarily definitive points, right, for a number. And if it can be justified and through water reporting and data, we try to, you know, make it as real and as possible. And when we encourage or induce or people have the wisdom to invest in infrastructure that allow them to have water storage, are they then able to supplement and meet any gaps that they have in irrigation need by way of our allocation of 2500 plus a supplemental infusion of water coming from their own storage systems? You know, that's a great strategy and something we'd love to like actually test and get proof on and data to support. But unfortunately, a lot of our agricultural users or even to systems in general aren't collecting that data, aren't doing that type of analysis. So we need to really push all water purveyors, whether it's not potable or non-potable, to really start to look at how we can be better stewards of those resources and collect the data. Because I don't have a definitive answer for you that that strategy is actually working because we don't have reports on that. Got it. We look forward to that continuing discussion. If I i second question i have three items uh chair uh councilman uh is he available for you respond to question yes go ahead councilman thank you for your report i really appreciated the way you responded to the questions and the issues that were raised by the public by saying, okay, if you say our data is old, or if you say there's gaps, here's what we did. Here's what we included. And I really appreciate that approach to it. And then invite, what did we miss? And it seems like as people said, you missed this, you then went and backfilled that information into your plan, which I think is an excellent approach. My question for you is on the issue of incentivizing or inducing conservation. We live in an era of excesses, when people can actually afford to be excessive and are undaunted by a fine or a tiered rate schedule to be excessive. So are you finding that that strategy of having higher rates really works to induce conservation in certain quarters? Or might we have to put the very permit at risk or uh have the power to re make our own reductions if they don't comply what's working yeah great question and I think that the tiered structure was was one of the first uh efforts uh to address those very large users uh some of them were some of the hotels that that still had those huge uh water uses during during a pandemic when they were closed so i think that was the first step but but you're right part of the strategies we had to kind of do it in in conjunction with other things for instance you know uh the water director talked about expanding our r1 uses if we are going to use so much water well you know we need to expand our r1 uses in those areas where there's high water use so that we can you know we can use recycled water in some of those areas where there's high water use so that we can use recycled water in some of those areas. So I think it's, yeah, the tiered work, but also a pun intended multi-tiered approach to doing other things in conjunction with those conservation efforts. I think the higher water taxes was just to kind of deter and encourage um conservation but you're right i mean there's other there's other things that we still need to also do some of the things were like if there's a lot of pool usage. Maybe we should be covering pools for evaporation so that they're not being evaporated in the dry area. So those are some part of the discussions that came out throughout our two year process. I think throughout government, we're looking at the issue of fines. And for some people, those fines just are meaningless. So if fines are meant to induce conformance and compliance, it doesn't work. Yeah. And the other, you know, it's normally a country that has the water restrictions. So we're hoping to expand water use use whether it be through the East Maui water Authority to increase water from from there um or you know other sources so that we're not putting certain parts of the county on water restrictions while others uh enjoy you know more water use right thank you very much uh for your response and your testimony today uh chair the last question is for you i my zoom screen is showing that that perhaps uh lucienne dene and keomoku kapu might be interested in testifying on this matter is that correct yes i do have them in the waiting room so after we finish with the with the commission asking any questions i'm going to take a little break and then we'll take questions from the those in the chat so thank you thank you yes um commissioner meyer did you want us did you have any questions thank you chair not at this time thank you very much commissionerato. Do you have any questions? Not at this time. Thank you, Chair. Thank you very much. And I guess I just want to confirm that this plan is really a framework right? It's to guide future decisions. It in and of itself is not an authorization or decision Jeremy Eva Shane I'll agree okay all right thumbs up yes very good very good and I do appreciate um the county's responsiveness to the questions and you and Shane in particular Mahalo for your effort at community engagement. That's really where I come from. I'm a kind of a process person. I leave I leave the experts here on the substance, but I am much more of a process person. You know it's important that people feel like they've been heard and listened to, and you apparently did a lot of that. You heard the concerns, you made appropriate adjustments, in particular, especially with respect to Native Hawaiian rights and issues. So again, mahalo for taking the pause, not rushing to get the plan approved, but really taking the time to engage the community in ways that are meaningful to them so that this document is much more reflective of their concerns and approaches so again mahalo to the effort I have one more question okay go ahead just a comment you know this commission is not a stranger to controversial issues on Maui with water and you know the comments, it sure would be great in April to have some sort of smaller executive summary or something. You guys have worked so hard on this. To be able to have a 1300 page document that nobody can access is not really reflective of the work that you put in. So I'm really hoping in April that there is some sort of executive summary to make it a little more easy to read i think that would benefit all the future water issues on maui thank you no thank you you might want to take um uh commissioner kagawa viviani's offer to have her student did you have a question aurora i did have one more follow up. All right, it's actually directed to our sort of ex officio doh representative, I guess, and and the presenters. You know i'm thinking about wahoo and molly's trajectory of urbanization and our current water quality issues that i'm becoming more and more aware of. I'm teaching water and society this semester, get lots of questions from the students. We've covered recycled water and emerging contaminants. So in the case of Maui, you know, we do want to use recycled water, but how worried should we be about these emerging organic contaminants pharmaceuticals that are in our wastewater streams that could you know you know as well as nitrates um because it's not just about water amounts and allocations but as we use more water to creating more wastewater to have to then spend energy cleaning so if you have thoughts on on that and how to think about it in the cons context of the The the department is supportive of the use in the state, and is working very closely with the county of Maui on their reuse program and procedures and the future of it. So there is review of the treatment train, which is used for the reuse water and the importance of the treatment of the emerging contaminants, as well as those contaminants that we are aware of. So there is research that is being done and so we are aware and keeping track of it. We have staff from the department that is attending reuse conferences and symposiums. So they're trying to keep up as much as possible with all the changing improvements to the processes so that we can bring them here back to Hawaii. Any other comments? With that, I'm going to take a 10 minute break and we'll reconvene at 1030. Excuse me, did you know lucienne denise note in the text that she has other commitments and we may lose her testimony if okay then we wait till after the break i it's just i have i have a small bladder but lucianne we're gonna we're gonna hear you i want to make sure that we do give you an opportunity to speak before you have to leave so thank you thank you I have to be in another important conference call and they've already started without me my name is Lucy Andy nay uh greetings Chair Chang and Commissioners and Commission staff I'm testifying on behalf of the haiku Community Association we certainly Mahalo all the efforts that were made on this plan we were not consulted uh about the uh complete strategy of East Maui basal groundwater strategy. This is not the way to engage the public. If all the water for, or the majority of water for the central Maui area is to come from Haiku, and no one in Haiku can get a water meter, no one in Haiku has been able to get a water meter for 20 years. I want people to understand that. Then you have a meeting in Haiku and you announce what your plan is in Haiku so you can figure out the solution that fits for everyone. I've heard the presentations today. This is a framework, this or that. Please keep in mind, every environmental impact document will cite this plan and will not cite the policies. It will cite the numbers in the charts. It will say, you know, the chart says there's 2 million gallons a day available for more hotel growth in West Maui. Is that going to be a real fact after we look at what the real water situation of West Maui is? Is that going to be a fact of life? If it's not, it shouldn't be in this plan, or there should be a footnote that says this may be adjusted greatly and should be reflected in any documents every environmental document is going to say there's eight million gallons a day available for the central system because they're going to drew wells in haiku do we know if those wells in haiku are going to produce that amount, we do not. And the previous draft of the plan, which this commission rejected from 2010, actually stated that there were great uncertainties about the Haiku strategy and about several other strategies. It was honest. This plan is not honest. I can't go into the details. I only have three minutes, but I guess the only way to explain these details is to ask for a contested case and have time to really explain. This is not about conservation measures like turning off the water when you brush your teeth. This is looking at South Maui, where 11 million gallons a day of potable treated county water is used and five million ends up in the sewage treatment plant. The other six million is probably used for irrigation. Is that a sound strategy when we are facing climate change? This document has some mealy mouth. It doesn't come up and say we need a strategy to make this different. Now the folks in South Maui are talking about this. They're updating their community plan right now and they're suggesting hey there's two million gallons being used to water in Wailea. Can we not use that water and instead use our one water to irrigate these deserts into oases? Our plan just leaves out this important information in spite of everybody's attempts, and it should be readable. Our former plan was readable. In fact, the 1,900 draft was not accepted by this commission. That's a fact that's kind of buried a new 1,992 version was that was done by a consultant, not done in-house. I can't even start to explain how off this data is. Framework or not, everyone's going to be looking at the data. When your data says that A and B is going to be needing 4,000 to 5,000 gallons per day per acre or mahipono and their actual reports that are available online show that they're using under 2,000 million gallons a day over the 5,000 acres they've planted. Something's wrong. We don't have the right data here and we can't have a good plan. In fact, this plan is not going to be updated in five years. It may be another 20 years because it's structured so poorly. It really needs, the structure needs to be redone and it needs to be made updatable. I commend the efforts that Council Member Sinensi made. He was honest with you. Many of the things that were asked for by the Kanaka community were completely ignored despite his best efforts simply because people don't want to face the inconvenient truth that we have less water we can't have the same farming strategies we can't have 24 22 23 percent loss with our ditch systems we can't have 60 percent water system uh i'm i'm done i think there will need to be a contested case to really explain what is not right with this plan and why you should not accept it so thank you commissioners for listening thank you very much lucien go to your next meeting but well again no decision will be made today but thank you so much for your testimony. Mahalo. I appreciate it. Mahalo to you. So, I am going to take, we'll take a, we'll come back at 1035. So stay tuned, those of you that are anxious to testify. But we'll take a seven minute break. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Thank you. you you you Okay, go ahead. We're back in session. Mahalo everybody out there. We all needed to take a little break. So thank you very much. Appreciate the presentation. I'd like to now move on to the public testifiers. I will for the record. I want to know that we have received written testimony from Carol Lee, come a, Lucretia Odey, I apologize if I mispronounced that, and Barbara Berry. We have received written testimony, including from Tara Apo Priest. It was a petition. I have people that have signed up to provide oral testimony besides Lucienne Denae, Mary Ann Kamalani Pohaku Kua'aina Productions and Cody Nemeth. I also see a Kiamoku Kapu. So I'm going to go down the list first, if you don't mind. The first on the list is Maryianne if you could unmute yourself oh you're not she's not in no okay um next is cody namet cody are you on okay then we'll go to um i see kemoku kapu kemoku aloha go ahead hi aloha chair chang and commission for this opportunity for me to testify important law mahalo to see where in staff jeremy kimura for his synopsis on all the data details provided uh also the hearing for our community concerns uh it was great to share the synopsis on all the data details provided. Also the hearing for our community concerns. It was great to hear the synopsis coming from your staff. Now to Councilmember Shane St. Ancy and having an ongoing dialogue with our Moko Island Council's needs in implementing Native Hawaiian and Puleana culture traditional rights and sharing the importance of seeking traditional generational knowledge why that is important is because we're losing a lot of the ground rooted pupuna in our community and it's really important that we seek the mana from them now to try to see how we can incorporate those values with the water use development plan we in maui pomohana like thorough this is boy we finally feel we have a great opportunity of being a part of a greater result and hoping that now that um pomohana which is the west side of maui has finally been designated even gives us a greater more greater opportunity to being a part of having a primary resolve in bringing more honest recommendations to the plan I hope that in the future we will always be considered to be a part of the recommendation that provided for the Maui water use development plan. Komohana is different in many ways. For many years, the west side of Maui had been bombarded by private interests and the municipalities between the county as well as private sector. It's good to see that now that the state had designated, now we finally have a referee to bring our major concerns to the forefront and i hope that um when we didn't support the plan it was generally for the whole of maui not just komohana but also hekina in the east side as well as kihei that the plan was really lacking a lot of um grassroot kind of information on how the community concerns can be met. Well, I mahalo all of you for your due diligence. I know that this isn't an action item, and I just wanted to mahalo the route that this is going. It's great for the Komohana community knowing that hopefully on the east side when they stop the water authority there'll be some kind of value you know where we can actually look at things that we can help incorporate on kumohana side on the west side of maui so mahalo for your time and mahalo for this opportunity to testify i'm willing to answer any of your questions thank you mahalo do any commissioners have any questions for kemoku seeing none again mahalo for participating in the process and representing the community and in particular mahalo do we have anybody else in the waiting room here to testify okay um i don't see anybody else here in the waiting room here to testify and i don't see anyone anyone in the boardroom wanting to testify okay okay with that being said again this is a non-action item i've greatly appreciated um the presentation on this matter. Anything final commissioners? Do you have any final questions or comments you'd like to make before I close this agenda item? Okay, seeing none, my understanding, Kaleo, this is coming back before the commission in April. Oh, we are planning to go for April, but we will talk with DWS based on the request made about an executive summary or something like that and determine whether or not we can meet that timeframe and the agenda is timeframe as well. So at a future meeting to be determined. So very good. So again, for those on zoom or on youtube a meeting will be scheduled in the future not too sure if they'll be next month but i think the commission staff is taking into consideration the comments that were made today both by the commissioners as well as the public and will respond accordingly and schedule the item as an action item. So please check our website. I believe this presentation is now available online. So again, please also go and check online on the Commission's website. If you'd like to review the presentation with that. I'm now going to move on to item c one okay uh let us get uh everyone into the room so again mahalo keomoku and those who are here to testify on b1 c1 um it's to find patrick and naomi goose goose farms violation of section 174C-93 of Hawaii revised statutes, as well as section 13-168-32 of the administrative rules, construction of a stream diversion works without a permit. Kahlil. All right, Chair, Dean Ueno will be leading today's presentation. Dean, go ahead um just the heads up that uh kapali is uh still connecting to audio okay do you um yeah uh i think you can just proceed dean just in this time yep okay uh good morning commissioners and aloha uh Dean Owono with the commission's stream protection and management branch uh here presenting on submittal uh c1 I do want to apologize um I think given the the time since we were originally going to present this submittal back in November um and again in in February before the Commission meeting got cancelled, I lost track of the revisions that we had made to the submittal since we were originally going to present in November of 2022. And so I did provide an addendum to correct some of the information that is presented in the submittal. A hard copy, I believe, has been presented to those in the DLNR boardroom, as well as a digital copy was sent to the commissioners, and the file has been posted on the commission website. So if I can start, in the summary of request, I'd like to replace per the addendum replacing item one, which is to approve the after the fact stream diversion works permit SDWP 5008.6 application for 9,000 GBD gallons per day for two acres of dryland taro and one acre of diversified agriculture from one diversion consisting of one one and a half inch hose connected to a 110 gallon per minute solar water pump. The GOOTS I believe had originally applied for a total of three pumps located at two points along the stream and so that's that's reflected in the original submittal secondly the landowners for the diversion intakes on tmk's 245016888 and 245017888 are unknown if identified in the future then the applicant shall follow all current rules and regulations with the new landowners which may include revisiting permit approvals with the Commission. And then lastly, fine that no fines be imposed on the applicant for the construction of a stream diversion works without a permit per 174C-15 and 174C-93 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. Excuse me. The Commission is in the process of amending its administrative rules and adopting a simplified process for stream diversion works permits for traditional and customary. Mayor Mrakas, native one practices and the applicant worked with Commission staff to comply with the current permit process, I would also like to note. And so, you know, I have apologized to the groups for the time that this process has gone on. You know, we're unable to conduct site visits for a long period. And so just working with them was a bit of a hardship on their side, just frankly because of COVID and the struggles that we faced in communicating. So moving on in the background, adding to the end of the background section on page five, we did receive a letter from the State Historic Preservation Division on November 15th. As noted there, SHPTI has no objections to the ongoing use of the project area for agricultural purposes. However, SHPTI does recommend or recommends the property owner hire an archaeological consultant to develop a plan for the continued preservation of the Haia Terra system. The inventory number indicated there, including the appropriate cultural use. So there's a portion of the group's property which does occur within the higher terrorist terrorist system. And that is that letter from ship. D is attached in exhibit 8 at the end of the addendum. Furthermore, on April, on, excuse me, November 30th, 2022, commission staff conducted a site visit to Coahoma Valley, including to the applicant's property. And so at that time, it was, we were informed that the applicant had purchased a one 110 gallon per minute solar powered electric pump to replace the pumps that were referenced in their original application. The commission staff also verified that the diversion stated in the informal complaint email from August 12, 2022, does not provide water to the applicant's property. Subsequently, staff confirmed that the applicant has transitioned to solely one 1.5-inch hose connected to the 110-gallon-per-minute solar water pump. The original gas-powered pumps, which had a 1-inch hose connected to a 32-gpm pump and a 2-inch hose connected to a 152-gpm pump, will be used only for backup on cloudy days when the sunlight is insufficient to power the solar water pump. On page six, noting the project description, the applicant originally applied for two diversions. Again, this is just to correct the number of pumps that the applicant is applying for. And then lastly, on replacing the last sentence in the second paragraph on page six under the project description section, the applicant has also installed a prefabricated bridge over Cahoma Stream. That's the only addition to that sentence. In the agency review comment, as noted earlier, SHPD did provide a letter, and so that information is there. Moving on to the Kapa'akai analysis on page 14. Just to note in that table that is listed there under item one one of the tmk numbers was missing from that table and you'll see there two four parcel two four five zero one six zero zero nine should be added and then lastly if i can go through the recommendations for the record So we find that the we recommend that the Commission number one find that the applicants violated section 174C-93 HRS and section 13-160-32 of the Hawaii administrative rules which state that no person shall construct or alter stream diversion works other than in the course of normal maintenance without first obtaining a permit from the commission. Second find that no fines be imposed an applicant for the construction of a stream diversion works without a permit per HRS sections 174C-15 and 93. The commission is in the process of amending its administrative rules and adopt a simplified process for stream diversion works permits for traditional and customary native Hawaiian practices and the applicant worked with the commission staff to comply with the current permit process number three as you note there are some changes in the addendum so i'll read from the addendum approved stream diversion works permit sdwp 5508.6 application to divert approximately 9 000 gpd from two acres of dryland callow, for two acres of dryland callow and one acre of diversified agriculture from the Coahoma stream, to the standard conditions in Exhibit 7 and the special conditions below. A, if the land owners for the diversion intake sites on TNKs 45016888 and 45017888 are identified in the future that the applicant shall follow all current rules and regulations with the new landowner which may be something which may include revisiting this permit with the commission before the applicant starts cultivation on TMK 45016009 the applicant shall have a plan including appropriate cultural use for the continued preservation of the Haya Terra system. State inventory number is 50-50-03-01776, developed by an archaeological consultant. If the applicant does not have the above mentioned plan in place by August 5th, 2023, this plan will become a condition of a water use permit for water uses on TMK 45016009. Number four, issue a written warning to the applicants indicating that any future violations involving stream diversions without the necessary stream diversion works permit and petition to amend the in-stream flow standard may be considered a repeat violations with fines up to five thousand dollars for each day of violation and lastly provide notice to the applicant that an application for a water use permit must be made no later than august 5th 2023 to continue using surface water that concludes staff's presentation uh the applicants are available if you have any questions thank you thank you dean commission mike yes dean thank you very much for the presentation if the commission approves this are we now allowing commercial use for traditional and cultural native Hawaiian practices um that's a good question um uh yeah um i think there's a um there's the uh the applicants may be able to speak there to that there is a portion of their, their, their agriculture which which does provide for home use. And I guess I'm in a sense bartering as for in a traditional customary way. But yes, some of that agriculture is being used for commercial sale. And, yeah, so there is a twofold use as part of their, their, I do understand the rationale, because we are trying to streamline the permits for traditional and cultural, but we know the issue of commercial use is out there. And currently, it's not allowed. I don't know if it's evolving or, but I think it's important if we do approve this, we state somewhere in the recommendation about this as an ongoing issue, because we don't wanna set a precedent that then will be used by other people. I don't know if Kaleo you have any ins and outs on that. Yeah. Thank you, Commissioner Alston, I hope you can up a good point. The what we've been trying to do at the staff level is to work with the applicants and in this case, you know, a majority of the use as described in the application is for subsistence purposes and traditional customary practices the way that the diversions work although using modern techniques does there are body involved or stream water portions of stream water from what I understand are returned back to the stream um so it is a it's a policy imbalance that the commission has to consider um but you're correct as of today, traditional customary practice does not include commercial use. And maybe just some statement that this does not provide a precedent for commercial use, traditional cultural and any future applications or something just so we're not going down a road we don't wanna go down. Well, one of the things that we always advise is that you have the series of facts before you and this is specific to this permit application and this current competition only um we did highlight in the submittal that staff have been based on prior uh direction from commission to look at ways to help support traditional customary practices of native clients in the permitting process and whether an expedited or an exempted process is something we should pursue. I think this is related to a Lima Huli violation, something very similar to this where a pump was put into the stream but supported traditional color cultivation. So we're trying to balance with staff on is it one dollar worth of commercial, the trigger, or is it absolutely zero know is it you know one uh one dollar worth of commercial i understand the trigger or is it absolutely zero is it a range and so we we're using our best judgment in this context to provide a recommendation for you to consider um but this is a decision the commission thanks for that i think the min the minutes will show the discussion that we had that should protect us in the future because well, what is the level of commercial use? Correct. I'm not against, you know, farmers market and landowners selling things for some sort of income, but it could be a misinterpretation. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you, Dean. Commissioner Hannes, your hand is up. Yeah. Great question, Commissioner Buck. And thank you, Kahlil, for your response on that. And I just wonder, are you in consultation with Kahulia'u and the Native Hawaiian scholarship team at the Richardson School of Law? They may have some thoughts on these rights and how to have them evolve in a current state? Yeah. No, we are not. I'm sorry. No. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Were you asking us? Well, I was asking Commissioner Deputy. Sorry. No, no, no. I understand. Ma'am. Yeah. Sorry. Thank you, Ohana Guth. Yeah, we've been in contact, we're constantly in coordination with Kahuliau and others, and including our legislators who have policy conversations about it. I think there was, last session there were amendments to the water code that started to articulate, for example, exemptions from water licensing for kalo grown in traditional customary manner and there was a conversation about whether commercial farming kalo farming would also qualify for that exemption from water licensing so there's an indication on a policy level this dialogue um between you know what what policy stance the state should take in supporting call of cultivation i use kalo as an example of a traditional customary practice um we are working with anybody really to kind of look at the evolution of the code on its application to our modern times and so i think what some of the things we are looking at is an evaluation of the intent. And so even in some of the review commission reports, it already starts to anticipate that, like one of the recommendations was to exempt all, you know, traditional customary practices from having to get a permit from us. But right now they're still required to get a permit from us. So we're trying to balance between what is and isn't required. Okay, and commissioners, if I can kind of chime in, there has been legislation proposed this session regarding traditional customary practices and commercial use. It has been the position of the department in our testimony that under Article 12, Section seven, it it specifically says not for commercial use. So we have taken the position that it is really just for subsistence purposes. You can have a traditional practice, but I think because it is so we understand that it's an evolving issue. I think we're just not ready to make, at this point in time, take a position contrary to, I think, how we are interpreting the law. Now there may be some changes in case law, but I think at this point in time, we are taking the position that traditional customary practices do not include commercial use and we were successful in actually getting proposed legislation to delete that so i think ongoing conversation clearly um you know if we are supporting agricultural use we do have to kind of look at this but i think that that is a that you know that's a question probably far beyond at this point in time unless there's a change in the law i think we are kind of drawing maybe a little a thin line but i think one that we're holding to that it has to be traditional customer practices for subsistence use now priorities for for purposes of of issuance and public trust yes traditional customer practices may have a priority clearly over commercial use so i think the rubber hits the road when we start doing things like that but at this time that is the department's position it's a it's a complicated issue it sounds like we have the right team in place to kind of uh plug into all the conversations about this issue but I mean subsistence back in back in the day meant you traded you know Carlo for fish today you got to pay property taxes you got to you know you got to pay uh for a cultural consultant uh to do to subsist so i i think uh good it's it's a difficult issue and appreciate that uh consideration is being made to protect our interests but not open the door to something we don't want to open to but also really define that term of what does commercial really mean uh i have a question for uh kawahana Guth. Now you can unmute. Hi. Aloha. So the Hayatera system is, well, first of all, do you perceive that the retention of an archaeological consultant, and I've hired a few in my life, and they can get expensive, is that going to pose a burden on your uh ohana of users absolutely we got a quote we got a quote from sms and they want to charge us 11 500 plus airplane fare and car rental and last year we made 25 000. so you know when you guys are talking commercial we're providing food for the community for our kupunas we do two farmers market a month that's it it's enough it's all that we can handle we're in our 60s we've we've farmed almost 40 years of our life and it's just you know ship d is saying things that's not even true that we have water going through the hyatt terraces down to our property all of that is untrue and I don't know where they're getting their information from hmm uh did any of this higher Terrace extend to Kamehameha schools land which is in that vicinity or is it off their land? I'm not sure. Because it could be that Kamehameha, who has land in that area, may have done some landscape level archeological reviews that could provide you, and they might be able to provide you access to that information. But I would encourage our outreach to the school who's done a lot of research on their lands and the surroundings? I'd like to share a little bit about my background. I am a lineal descendant. My maiden name is Akiona. My father was Albert Kauhilani Akiona. His mother was Mabel Mahoi Akeo Akiona, and her mother is Ella Kapiveloa Hayakekai, and her father is Hayakekai. So that Haya Terraces, they are a family to me. I would, we would never desecrate any of the burials or the land all we're doing is farming thank you well i would uh khalil press week our staff can help facilitate those the access of the information so that whether it's uh retained acquired through somebody they have to retain at their expense which would be a burden to them we might be able to get that information in other ways to provide the assurance to shifty that there's the sites are being adequately protected uh from this use is not a threat to uh the sanctity of the sites can i also give you a little history of our history with SHPTI? Sure proceed. When we first purchased the property in 2020 and began our application process with Rebecca Alakai, item 34 on the application was to reach out to SHPTE and we did and again this is in 2020 when covid was full blown and I talked to Andrew McAllister and he told me they weren't doing site visits because of covid so we marked that on our application and we navigated our way through the application which was difficult but Rebecca helped And in November, we finally had it all to the place where they deemed it complete and we submitted it. And then the following year in 2021, we were actually on the agenda with you folks a few times, but got taken off because they decided they needed to look a little deeper into our application because of they suddenly became aware of our association with the Haya Terraces and so I had let them know that I were very familiar with it because of my wife's Ohana in fact she even has family buried up there as recent as her father's siblings that died at birth. There was 11 children, but two of them had died and they were buried in Keo'i'uhi'u, which is that area. And so anyway, um, the, we had to, they let us know that Hi Chris was their new website and that we had to navigate that now and so we did and so in November of 2021 we finally got that completed and in January they said that they completed their review and that we needed a letter from the government agency who requested the review and so we had let Sea Worm know and at the time we were told that they were super busy but they would get to it and so we left it at that and that was January of 2021 and then in May of 2021 we got a letter from Kathy Yoda with a new form some type of a HRS6E or something like that which was a new form that the State Historic Preservation was putting out there for people to use. And they asked that we would use that. And I explained that we already went through the review and they said, well, they never got a determination letter. And I asked, well, did you ever send that letter in that they asked for, you know, from the government agency requesting the determination and then they said oh no they actually forgot and so they sent it to me then so i had to upload it and send it to shifty but i also sent in that new form and what it did was it generated a whole new review so this was in june that now i got this next review submitted and we waited and waited and I kept calling and checking on them because I was holding up our application and shifty finally in November last November tells us that they cannot do a review of our property because it's an after the fact and according to their books they can't do after the fact and that we've already unearthed probably the area and they show in their pictures that we've had a stream diversion on that side of the stream and water flowing through the higher terraces that is totally totally false we have not we have six land commission awards two on one side of the stream and four on the other. The two on one side of the stream are accessible for us to drive to do our work. During COVID it was perfect because we have six grown kids and their families and everybody came and helped us clear the land and plant kalo. It was actually a really special time for us. But we didn't do anything across the stream. We didn't do anything across the stream, which is where four more Land Commission Awards are. And the Haya Terrace, the Haya property is adjacent to ours on top of the hill. We're down at the stream area and they are on top of the hill. This is the land where Kohoma Stream and Kanaha Stream merge a little ways up from there. And it's like a, it goes up about 200 feet. And that's where the Haya property is and the Haya terraces. And for them to say that we have a diversion, which we don't't and that they have water going through the terraces is so unbelievable but there's nothing we can do about it because they never came out to visit us we wanted them to do a site visit but they never did in fact i could barely get a hold of them and since they sent this determination letter saying that they're going to recommend to sea worm that we get denied after not even coming out and saying all these false things we're just I I wrote to Dean and said I'm just flustered I don't know what to do and I appreciate Dean and his willing to try to you know he came out there with Alexa and Aaron and they could see that we haven't done anything over there. It's still an international state. There's no reason why SHPTI cannot come out there and do a study to see if the terraces are being impacted or will be impacted by any type of cultivation or planting. There's nothing we've done over there except built a bridge that goes from one bank to the other. That's all. And now they want us to do a consultant. And we did finally, we called several and finally one answered our call. And they narrowed down where we're talking about and everything. And they gave us a proposal. And like Naomiami said it comes out to be you know after we pay for their car and airfare about twelve thousand dollars which again made us lose sleep again and we're just all we want to do is grow food we really do i have a degree from agriculture in agriculture from University of Manoa. And ever since we've been married in 1984, we've always done some sort of subsistence farming with her family land out in Honokohau. And then, you know, now we're continuing to do this up here. And we do make kulolo, which we sell at the farm. We sell at the farmer's market when we make it. And and um you know whatever we that's like our main thing people know us for our cololo but we wanted to make we were making poi for a while and then um the board of health said we can't do it because we don't have a commercial kitchen unless we actually uh don't use a machine and we pound the boy by hand but i'm not ready to do that. I got my Papa Koogee eye and my boy pounder, and I tried, but it's too hard. So anyway, that's our story. I hope for some, you know, I hope, you know, it makes sense to you that we haven't done anything. It's wide open for them to come and do their study. We should not have to go to the private sector and empty our bank account to do it thank you thank you thank you very much is there any way we can uh it seems like shifty's position that may be based on misinformation and the lack of kind of a ground truthing site visit is rather than kind of take an easy path for a state agency to say, have the applicant prove something at their expense. Is there a way we can get this, perhaps get this clarified and avoid that expense, which would be a burden yeah commissioner hannis you know what i'm what i'm going to recommend and i'd like to hear from you know there's people testifying too but we have i don't know no i mean goose if you know hinano rodriguez yes so hinano he is our um he's our cultural he's our cultural and history branch chief. He actually is on Maui. I would ask that Hinano talk story and do a site visit with you, review Shifty's letter. Thank you. And then if there's any changes that need to be made, I would ask that Hinano have an opportunity to review this clearly you have a you have a lineal connection to this land i cannot imagine that you would in any way uh attempt to you know damage or desecrate your ohana that's here. So I'd like to make sure that Hinano have an opportunity to coordinate directly with you. And I mean, I think when we get down to the recommendations, that will be something that I will recommend, especially he's there, he's on Maui, that I think he will be in a better position to make an appropriate recommendation from SHPD with regard to your particular activity. All right. Thank you so much. Thank you so much. Okay. Does any other commissioners, I would like the GOOTS to have an opportunity to tell their whole story, but any commissioners, would like the goods to have an opportunity to tell their whole story but any commissioners do you have any questions um before i have the goods have an opportunity to tell us there's any additional information um sorry chair if i may um aaron had some dr aaron stroke had some information to add to the uh to neil uh commissioner hannis's question okay go ahead aaron thank you aaron stark the stream protection management branch as uh the goods and the submittal identify um staff uh with the stream protection management branch conducted multiple site visits and i just wanted to provide some visual context for what they are talking about, if I may. Yes. Share some photos. The Ahoma stream runs in this valley from right to left. Mekhi is down there. And this photo is taken up on the ridge where the terracing is located. And then, if I can change. I can't. Oh, there we go. Alright, so looking upslope is where most of the barrels are located. This is clearly much higher than the stream channel, and therefore to transport water or cultivate crops at this elevation would be logistically challenging. Here are some of the locations. And then looking up Kanaha Valley right here, you can see again, the stream tunnel is much lower in elevation. So there's no opportunity, there would be no possibility of disturbing these sites. And then going down slope all the way, There would be no possibility of disturbing these sites. And then going downslope all the way, you can see down here at this lower elevation, this is where the proposed, within the LCA, where the proposed agriculture is. And this is clearly in land that was in cultivation at some point. So I just wanted to provide that context. Great. We appreciate that, Aaron. point. So I just I just wanted to provide that context. Great. We appreciate that. Aaron. Can I can I just clarify? Sorry. Thank you. No, no, thanks. Thanks, Aaron. So the tariff system, from what I understand, is a agricultural system. There's also been an intermixing of burials language in this conversation. So I think in talking with Shifty and then conversations with the Gouttes, right, the burials are located at Malka, so burials aren't gonna be impacted. But under historic preservation law, right, we have an obligation to protect archeological sites, especially if they're registered. And so I think that's the extent of the comments that came from archeological branch. So I think your recommendation to have the culture and historic branch review this and and provide additional recommendations this body would be helpful um i don't know if they did review the application most of the permits are reviewed mostly from the archaeological branch so i think your recommendations that include hinano would be a great recommendation moving forward and whether or not they would deviate from still requiring our plan or not because it is usually standard language that CHIPD requires right so we have to work through that even with lineal descendants that have claims these are just larger Wahi Kupuna stewardship issues right that we have to deal with throughout the state. And there is a nexus here with the reestablishment of Oya and traditional cultural sites before the Water Commission. I'm probably gonna get scolded for saying this, but sometimes we need to use common sense and be practical. But Hinano is from the area. I think we should give Hinano an opportunity to visit the Gouttes if he hasn't already, and provide us a better assessment based upon a site visit, based upon his own cultural and historical knowledge of the area. He can perhaps, maybe as you say, doing a site visit will give him a better appreciation for what you are doing in relationship to these particular sites. I also think that he would, so he knows that your activities is going to be further Makai from where the historic sites are out of harm's way of the both the burials as well as the, you know, the features. that's, let's see what he says. I think he now takes into considerations people's lineal connection. I'm not in any way disregarding SHPD and the archeologists, but I think this is one that merits cultural considerations. So that's, as we get to the recommendations, let's explore that. But thank you, thank know, as we get to the recommendations, let's explore that. But thank you. Thank you, Aaron and Dean. It's 1120. The goods. Would you like to say, would you like to provide any overview of what you're doing before we take a break? And then I know there are people here who would like to um who either provided written comments or who would like to provide oral comments so i'd like to give the goods an opportunity to provide us an overview of their activities and what occurred you're on mute you're on mute. You're on mute. I think I've said all that I needed to at this time. Mahalo. every day people drive by and see us every day out there working hard and um we love it we always have and um we you know hope that our kids and grandkids you know that all come up there and enjoy it as well that they can carry this on as well so um we try to grow as much things that we can eat. I don't like to grow anything that we don't like to eat, but we do enjoy eating what we grow, our papayas, bananas, our kalo, and we've planted a lot of mango trees, and this year they're starting to flower for the first time and give fruit so we're super excited and um we have a whole backyard uh down in lahaina of plants that we are excited to put in the ground fruit trees and things that around the edges and perimeter that will further help us to live off the land and for our family and grandchildren. So that's all. That's our dream and it's coming. It's true. It's happening. We're living the dream. I'd like to say though that these lands that we have are legacy lands and that we will pass it down to our children and I hope our children will continue this legacy of farming the land working the land that is what we've always done um and something that we really enjoy that we believe in that you know we can only be stewards of the land and we need to take care of the land. Well, we don't use any fertilizers, we don't use any pesticides. We do everything by hand. And anyway, that's what's going on with the Guth Ohana. Thank you so much. Do the commissioners have any questions for the Guths? Can I just ask you, so are you connected to this land? Do the commissioners have any questions for the groups? Can I just ask you, so are you connected to this land? Is this where you grew up, where your Ohana grew up? No, this is not my family land. We bought this from West Maui land. All right, thank you so much. I am gonna take a very brief break of seven minutes, and we're going to reconvene at 1130, as I do have some people in the waiting room who would like to provide some testimony. All right? Okay. Seven minute break. All right. Mahalo. Mahalo. Tchau. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Is it? Thank you. We're back on the record. I apologize. We took a little longer. So we have no further questions. I will say that we do have. We have received written testimony from its kazoo floris we've also received written testimony from consuelo apollo gonzalez and let me just summarize the kazoo floris was to oppose the after the fat permit the next one is consuelo apollo gonzalez again also writing that the goods should get fined the next written testimony is from kahikina kahiki lani niles who also says the goods should be the goods and one testimony from pk nakor the commission should hold the goods and issue a fine and the last one is from kailani, Kailana Moa Eli, who also says that they should be fined. So those are the written testimony. I have listed down for oral testimony, so we lani your first um could you unmute yourself sorry or keamoku are you two guys together keamoku okay mahalo this commission once again for allowing me to provide my testimony. You know, a lot of key things that came up in the discussion in the beginning, and mahalo to Michael Vuck, Commissioner Michael Vuck, for that question on commercial usage, which is not really missed and out of context many times when everybody looks at just the basic concept of what that means when you start talking about what kind of rights that Kuleana basically have versus people who purchase property. Kind of different in my eyes. Mahalo to Kaleo, for your mana o and clarification about commercial uses. And to you, Don, Chair Chang, for your knowledge and clarification of Article commercial uses and to you Don Chair Chang for your knowledge and clarification of article 12 section 7 and the Hawaii Revised Statute 7-1 ongoing gathering rights subsistence gathering rights is not for commercial use this HRS is actually from the Privy Council of 1850 and used as a system to clarify its use based on what occurred then and how it kind of intermingled to today's policies. I like to mention that I am a recognized lineal descendant of Ke'o'iwo'iwo Barrow Terrace, known as the Hyatt Terraces, which Kaleo corrected the barrels arloor by Manawa provided by Uncle Jonah Kea'i, he's no longer with us. So the descendancy recognition came from State of Sark Preservation's site number 5050-03-01776. And basically what I'm saying is that any further discussion has to do, even with this State Historic Preservation Division, to consider the recognized Nino descendants as well to be a part of the consultation. Not only myself, but also there's two others that was recognized in the state historic preservation branch and the barrel council which is mamea alcochino and kai gilani and iowas is another one that would recognize the lenient descendants that if any work or anything that even encroaches upon those areas should have some kind of consultation with recognized lenient descendants there is a report that we have um on the ongoing work by the four of engineers back in 1974 and in the last page of the report basically stresses the importance of the concluding recommendations that any other work that is done within this area, which be justified unnecessary to the Oklahoma stream terrorist area that was really implemented in this osteological plan that was done in 1974. There's another issue that I would like to also put on the table that there is multiple land permission awards um in my records i have three of them and the one that i have fully on up to is the land commission award of 80 21 upon one royal patent 1732 there's another one by nalehu which is another parcel land commission all 6621 royal patent 1722 issued to nalehu and also the higher terrace the highest terrace is also mentioned in the osteological report that these areas are highly significant and also Kuleana live on that area today. And Hyatt Terrace, where we are right now in the process of putting together a water use permit application for waters for two adjacent areas the point of getting to is after the designation was made the state designation was made it was important for us to make sure that we are implemented in a plan by how we would be able to continue our color cultivation within the areas that i mentioned, the land that I mentioned. And the possibility of getting just a simple water up in the terrace so we can start more managing and beautifying the terrace area, cutting the grass down so it's eminent that we're looking at what we actually protecting. That's a long management plan and I just hoping that to take into consideration that these things need to involve the recognized meaning of descendants of the area. I also want to ask that tax map key 245-017002 should be stricken to this request. It's cool. The honor we live on. And if the plan goes forward, what does it do for our application? So there's other paying applications that are in this area that is in the process now on the water use the water use permit. And how is this going to impact or negatively affect the work that we've been doing because before the designation those lands have just been cultivated even above in paloma with the repatriation of water provided by commandment schools to put water in the river to make sure that the kuleana has water for the ongoing cultivation of the taro. So main request is to make sure that 245017.002 is taken from this request because we live there and there was no permission um by doing all these altercations going past our food model for you just for this opportunity i am here to answer any of your questions thank you mahalo commissioners do you have any questions for Kiamoku? Kiamoku, are you familiar with the Guths? I see them. You know, I like the work that they're doing in the valley. I have no problem with that. They're just certain clarification that I want to make sure that we are part of, especially when it comes to the consultation of the higher terrorists. And also, you know know how is this uh diversion is going to affect our um does do the linear descendants um do they meet regularly or is there some is there some kind of organized Ohana that represents? We meet every Monday. Every Monday? Yeah, sit down and we talk about, especially the water use permit application, because once a designation was made, I wanna stress again that it's important for us to make sure that we lay down the ground rules pertaining to what we can do, what we cannot do to provide clarity. And this is not just Kohoma, it's Kalaula, going to the water use, to our Komohana. Komohana, Kuleana was the one that was vital to the state designation that we really felt that we needed it because we're being left out of the picture. We supported the designation just for that fact and made the record show that a lot of the purchases from West Maryland Company was not in support of the designation. This gives us more of an opportunity to be a part of the management system is there an opportunity for the goose to meet with um your you know the ohana that meets regularly i think i think that would be a possibility i don't know if you'd be uh depending on them and how they would want to do. But I know eventually down the road, when there is some kind of consultation with historic preservation, that there will have to involve the recognized linear descendants. Okay, thank you very much, Kiamoku. I see, Ui, Ui Lani, you've joined us. Did you want to say anything? I know you were you list um that you might want to provide oral testimony do you have anything you wanted to add okay um all right so um with that do the commissioners have any questions? Check this others. Oh, I'm sorry. So we can take them. Oh, okay, I apologize, I apologize. So Eric Mead is here, Kahi and Kapali are all here. I see one. Who's controlling that? Is that you, Darlene? No, you can just call them. Kapali, okay, I've got, is that Kapali? Who's controlling that? Is that you, Darlie? No. You can just call them. Kapali? Okay. I've got... Is that Kapali? Did you want to provide any testimony? Aloha. Yes, I would. Please. Okay. Aloha. Aloha, Chair Chang and Commissioners. Mahalo for this opportunity to speak. to speak to the staff as well. You know, I understand how much work went into even, you know, helping the goods to get to this point in their application for the after the fact permit. But, you know, there are a few things that really, really needs to be clarified. There are other end uses that have been included in this application that I don't think should be included in this application, that they should be considered on their own because some of the some of the tax map keys that were uh that were cited or at least included in the application initially i'm not sure if it changed over time maybe it got revised but at least what i'm seeing is like as uncle Kimoku had mentioned that there are several that should be stricken from the application. But there are other. I guess I feel like some some other properties were snuck into some way. Other people are currently residing in there that have been that have their own diversions on the stream, and also taking water for and for domestic consumption as well i'm not sure if that is included in the in the um in their request for how much they can actually harvest from the from the river um and whether or not that is included in the goods application um it's supposed to be i believe for agricultural use. But like I said, there's a lot of reason to think that some of the people who are residing on adjacent lands that have acquired those lands through the land company, they are also taking water from the river for domestic use and not necessarily for agricultural use. They have some agriculture, but to me, the extent is just to show that they're using that as an excuse to take water from the river. You know, before I go on, you know, I have to clarify that I am a descendant of Emily Haya, who owns the Haya Terrace. That is her aina. She is my father's mother. And I did not seek any lineal descendancy confirmation from any boards or commissions of the state. I feel like I don't need to. That is my that is my that is my grandmother's I know. So just to clarify, I am a whole I know as well of that place. I currently I currently steward several acres in the valley for other ohana as well. Land Commission Award 6621 to Nalehu as well as 8021 to Aha that Uncle Kiomoku had already mentioned in his testimony. I am one of the Hoao'''i of those lands. I have to add that I think Shipti's presence in the valley is very necessary because it's not just the Haia Terrace. Everywhere you look in that valley, there's significance. And the fact that the valley was abandoned for so long, for over 100 years, because the plantations took the water uh with the help from i guess you know from the diversion above kahoma stream um they took the water away from the valley our our families left the valley eventually and the land has been just sitting there abandoned for almost 100 years. So a lot of those lands, I mean, with respect to what was used by the plantations for sugar operations. Hey, Colin, my colleague, can you summarize your testimony? I'm sorry. Oh, I see. No, no worries. No worries. I just think that there's, there's other, um, um, there's people who are acquiring, acquiring lands through the land company that need to file their own applications when it comes to the GOOTS application. I feel like the GOOTS are extending their applications to even include others who are not necessarily serviced by the Guths. They have their own diversions. And so they need to be considered. So the commission needs to consider that they have their own applications reviewed. All right, that's a good point. Thank you, Kapali. I'm now gonna ask Kahi, you want to provide testimony to the commission yes yes i do please go ahead uh aloha uh commissioners and uh the chairman i've never uh watched a sea worm before i my apologies um i am testifying for in favor of the goods to get the permit. I am a lineal descendant of the original inhabitants of Kohoma Valley. My tutu was the Konohiki of Kohoma Valley. And I want to address a couple of things that so far I've heard one of them being commercial use and I want to address a couple of things that so far I've heard one of them being commercial use and I I guessing that that goes towards the Gutes using um their farm products and they sell it at the farmer's Market so my ohana was in the valley until 1936 farming kalo I have pictures and documentation to support this. And around the 1900s, the early 1900s to about 1915, Lahaina had a poi factory. And there's documentation of this poi factory from Lahaina restoration. And my ohana sold their kalo to that poi factory. And in turn, my ohana worked also for that poi factory. They were poi pounders, poi baggers. They harvested. So there was commercial use coming out from Kohoma Valley as from the late 1800s to about 1936 when they finally left the valley. I didn't know the Gutes until about five years ago, 2018, when I first met the Gutes. And their hollow that they grow over there is absolutely amazing and absolutely beautiful. And they are at the very beginning of the valley. And they brought the valley back to life. That's what the Guts did. And I mahalo them so much for it. I don't understand all the statutes that go into water rights for Kohoma stream. But what I do know, because I did the title search for all of the kuleanas in the valley, is that with each deed that got passed on, water rights was passed on to the next person. And hence they were passed on to Pioneer Mill, then into Kohomaoma land and then into the Gouttes. But I was doing some back research for the Gouttes. I live on O'ahu. So I came across a deed and it's dated February 1st, 1932. And it's from Pili Kekai and his wife, Mary Ann, John Manuia Kekai, who is a widower, and Haveli Kekai. And they were the children of Kekai, and Kekai was the son of Haya, who was the original landholder of Land Commission Award 6541 to Haya, which includes the higher terraces. And on this deed, it says that, intend to grant unto Pioneer Mill Company, the right and privilege of taking any waters from said lands that may be developed in the course of said tunnel excavation and construction. So this particular deed is from that ohana giving Pioneer Mill access through their land for water that was coming from Honokawai. And so, Kahoma Valley itself, it has a different system of what that valley was used for. And I also want to bring up, so I heard Kapali saying about diversions. Well, Kapali's family is squatting on land. They're squatting on Nalehu. They have no claim to that like that aina. And they also divert water. There's diversions in that valley going all the way far up to where Kamehameha Schools gave the water back to put the water back in the stream, which I am so thankful for. I 100% support that effort to make the stream run 100%. And in regards to Neil Hannes asking about KS, this area, so Kamamalu owns the upper part of that flat part in between Kanaha and Kahoma. The tip of the part is still owned by that Haya family. So, and Kapali is correct. His grandma is one of the owners of the Haya. Kahi, excuse me. Correct. His grandma is one of the owners of the high. He excuse me. I can't. But could you summarize because we're trying to my suffering. Okay. What I'm gonna summarize real quick is that the groups, Naomi especially. She is a native tenant of Kohoma Valley. I I don't think that she should have to apply for a permit, but I understand that that is the law now. But based on her, I'm sorry, somebody's trying to call me. But based on her rights as a native Hawaiian, and based on the fact that commercial use was used in Kahoma Valley to supply taro to the rest of Lahaina. They didn't just do it for free. Yes, there's bartering going around, but bartering only went so far and there was monetary use, monetary value given to the kalo that was grown in Kohoma Valley. So I know that that's a really, really touchy situation, but I do think that they should be approved because what they are doing provides for all of the community of lahaina all right thank you so much can we get her name for the record oh i'm sorry oh could you introduce yourself your full name i'm sorry okay thank you so much, Connie. Do I have, is it Eric Mead? Please go ahead. Aloha, Chair Chang and members of the Commission of Water Resources Management. My name is Eric Mead and I'm a student at the William S. Richardson School of Law. And in deference to the issues raised by previous testifiers which i believe should be addressed i support a precedence of waiting of these fines because of the constitutional priority of water use for traditional and customary native wine practices excuse me and uh i'm in heartened to hear that the commission is conscientious of the burdens that traditional and customary native land practitioners face thank you for this opportunity to testify thank you very much mr mead um do i have anybody else in the waiting room to testify on item c one seeing none all right thank you thank you i'm going to close public testimony i have now commissioners do you have any questions comments or motion this is commissioner kagawa viviani we have a question for Deputy Manuel and Erin Stroup. You know, clearly this is a really intense situation among neighbors and people who are connected to each other and in the same space. But just focusing on what we're responsible for as the Water Commission, I'm curious your view on, you know, if we approve this after the fact permit, what precedent does it set for both all the hard work we've been working on with IIFS enforcement and the fact we just designated Lahaina as a water management area. We tried, you know, we were leveraging penalties on Oluwalu. And yes, this is a different case, but it's clear from testimony that, that, and it's clear that people value the work of the goose. That's not at hand. What we are talking about is the water. And so how does this sort of affect our responsibilities to steward the resource and sort of mediate conflict. Sorry, 2 things let's focus on just stewarding the resource for the stream, and then Aaron and Dean can jump in. The use that's described and the quantity that's described has been evaluated against the IFS. As indicated in the presentation or in the submittal, the GOOTS are located at the mouth of the valley. So a lot of the other users that have testified are located in the mouth of them. So they wouldn't necessarily be impacted by the GOOTS diversion of water. The stream does and will continue to flow and the use per Aaron's analysis is de minimis. I will say within the context of the commission's regulation of water resources with designation coming forward, this Diversion Works permit is one process. The GOOTS will still have to apply for a water use permit, and there's opportunities for the commission to further evaluate and balance the GOOTS water use with all the other water uses in the Valley for in-stream and off-stream uses. So it's one step to try to quote unquote clean up some of the files, but water use permitting process that's coming this summer, the goods will still have to apply for a water use permit and the Commission will reevaluate and balance those reason beneficial uses at that time with all other users of this water of the stream. If I may, excuse me, Commissioner Kagawa-Viviani, in this case, so what the situation is that once the water was restored in Kohoma Valley from the Kamehameha schools and diversion, there were a number of people that we found out that began diverting water from the stream. And, you know, that's something that we're trying to work through to follow up on. In the case of the GOOTS, it's our understanding that West Maui Land Company began selling off land commission awards that are part of a bigger um tmk parcel um and so that's some of the people that are adjacent to the goods have also began diverting begun diverting water from the stream via via smaller pumps or pipes and so those are some follow- up actions that we'll need to work on. I think. And so one other thing is that the goods are understanding is that they are going through a subdivision process. So I believe that their lca is that they purchased from West Maui land are in the process of receiving their own TMK parcel numbers. And they may be able to speak to that more. Aaron, did you have anything to add? Just to take a broader view, the establishment of interim in-stream flow standards to support in-stream uses and repairing uses downstream anticipated the use of water in the repairing zone, the resurgence of traditional customary practices, the rejuvenation of ecosystems. So we knew this was likely to happen. We just hope that all of these repairing users that are diverting water will go through the necessary legal channels to reestablish those structures, if there's actual structures in the channel or pumps or that sort of thing. So we kind of anticipated this might happen. Does that help? Yeah, that helps. We kind of anticipated this might happen. Does that help? Yeah, that helps. I just wanna add a final comment. I think, I guess as a commissioner and as Kanaka'u'iwi, even though not of Maui, the last thing I wanna do is produce conditions that are gonna increase local conflict without a pathway to working through them um you know we open up a resource and and and then that's stimulating really good things but also there's these people who've been waiting for generations maybe to get access to that. And it feels like maybe somebody's jumping in line and creating. And I guess if I were to make a motion right now, I would want to defer a little bit and make sure we sort of sort out our understanding of those TMKs and LCAs and get people together. And maybe Kalil, you've been working at that already, but maybe, yeah, I've been working at that already but maybe yeah I just I just want to put that out there because I think it's a little people have been waiting long but it's also still and I'll just leave that comment can I respond to that comment because I think it leads down um so I appreciate that you know as a as a planner and as somebody that similar to chair that supports process is something that I encourage and support however we are a regulatory body right and so what we have before us is a request for a permit um and so I'm trying to honor the applicant's process and request and process it within the context of our authorities. We, you know, a lot of what you talk about is community building and community conversations. And to be honest, I'm not necessarily, I don't feel comfortable being the one always forcing these conversations to happen. We recommend it. we highly encourage it. We could recommend, I think one of the things, this is a conversation we can recommend consultation with, but making things subject to gets really, really challenging in this context. So I hear what you're saying. I hear the testimony from all parties, but I am working with staff and the applicants trying to present to this commission what's within our authority and within you know our space to help facilitate so i don't have there's larger systems and policies of how we better encourage community conversations um but at this point this as as cited in the submittal this has been a permit that's been languishing for years and um we want to help support especially in this context where we have somebody that's doing color cultivation just customary practices as well as some commercial? But getting them across that finish line to create some hope or movement on it. So that's just my response, commissioner. I honor you as a commissioner and decision maker, and we are here just to recommend decisions to you. You ultimately make the decision and we will follow your lead. Any other, oh, commissioner Katayama, yes. Hi, Kaleo, can you help me with this? The application is for a stream diversions permit. Is that correct? Yes, I'm sure. And the applicant, what is his legal access to that diversion? So the diversion, from what I understand, is a pump along the stream, along their parcel. Why is it that in the application, the landowner is unknown? Dean, you want to address this? Oh, so there are 2 parcels. Basically the stream channels and so we've we've seen other instances, and like Kona Kahao Valley, where though that 888 parcel was a when the Tmk parcels were drawn up or digitized originally the 888 was a number sequence that was assigned to these parcels where no landowner was identified. So it doesn't belong, it's not identified as a state or the county, any government entity or any private entity. It just, it's the outlier parcels where ownership has not been identified. So the occupancy and the maintenance of this diversion, is it sort of a free fall? Well, without doing an exact survey, the understanding is that the pump itself itself is on uh the parcel that the goods own um the stream itself is this 888 parcel so um yeah it's uh you know i guess just the the pipes itself would be going into the stream does that sense? Does that answer your question? Well, what does the Goots enjoy any kind of long-term standing and maintaining that or legal access to it? That I'm uncertain just because of the there'll be a land ownership issue that well I guess I mean have we granted these kinds of permits for lands with owners unknown to someone to have access to it yeah I'm trying to call recall if we did one in Honoko how where the parcel was where it was a similar situation. Yeah, difficult for me to answer that question. Koleo if you have anything to. Yeah, no, I don't. I mean, I think I hear what you're saying right now there's access the pump and the pipes are accessing the TMK which the stream is located on. And that that stream is identified it there's no land or identify. And so, for from our stance least in our initial review, we're recommending approval unless it's challenged, right? Unless somebody does actually come forward and say that they're the landowner and therefore permission should be sought through them. If, for example, it was a state of Hawaii, then a right of entry to access that parcel would be have to be granted via the state of Hawaii. But because there's no landowner identified, we don't have anybody to go to to determine whether or not that access is allowed or not. How much of this stream is in that 888 parcel? I'd have to look, Commissioner Dean. We'd have to pull up the team can analyze that. Yeah, i'd have to do a closer look but I think in the vicinity it's maybe just rough guess it's maybe a quarter mouse section. There are other portions along the stream that are owned by private entities. For example, just upstream of this application, the landowners of the three different TMKs are listed. What is their participation in the diversion? The goose may be able to better answer this, but as far as we know, the goose are the only ones operating their diversion. There are other pipes or pumps, as we've seen during our site visits, that have been in the stream at times. Between our first site visit to our last one, some of the pipes had changed. There were different, yeah, different pipes were, I think on our first site visit, some of the pipes were in place, but they weren't actually diverting, either because they had been broken or I'm not sure if they were clogged, but there was no water in them at the time versus when we went this last time. I believe there were additional, and Aaron may be able to speak better to this, but there were additional pipes in the stream different from the ones that we had seen prior and pumps that were observed. And those are all in the 888 parcel? So again, the 888 is just a small sliver of the stream itself. The pump that we observed was up on the bank, so I'm not exactly sure which parcel that was on. But yeah, I guess some of those pipes may have been in that 888 parcel. Are there any other diversion permits other than the boots? No. Or is it in process or have been approved? No, we have not. We need to follow up on on these other um diverters yeah it was it was kind of a messy situation initially because we didn't really understand what was going on as far as these lca these individual lcas within this larger parcel that was being sold off and how those how we would treat those in that case because in the initial complaint always you know as when we looked up ownership we we referred back to it I believe it was Kohoma land which is a subsidiary of West Maui Land Company um and so you know we were talking with with the uh President Peter Martin at the time and and his response was, well, we sold off these LCA parcels, so you need to talk to those people. So yeah, that's the situation we encountered early on. So who could sort of provide a little more clarity on the landowners listed as end users? Kohoma Land Company is one of them. Yeah, we'd have to work with them to identify the owners who that that had purchased through them. And the AG is comfortable about allowing us to issue diversion permits to someone that has no legal access um we have we haven't been consulted on that issue pardon i'm sorry cindy um we haven't been consulted on that issue if if the commission requires advice we'd want to look into it further youtube If you can be still going so don't worry we have some technical issues in the in the room. With Commissioner Katayama, the AG's office hasn't been consulted at this time. And if we'd like them to be consulted, we can we can do so it's just a matter of comfort and you know are we providing the goods with any kind of comfort by issuing a permit um I've got us yeah go ahead sure no I've got a question from Paul Meyer and I'm sorry I've got a hard stop at 12 30. so we're going to go up until 1230. Go ahead. Thank you. Hi, Cindy, a question, quick question for you. You know, I'm not an attorney and and have you looked into the question of traditional and customary activities being the basis for commercial activity, as is the case here. And what is, we've heard earlier today that the law currently does not provide for that. And somebody needs to change the law if they want to do that. And it really comes to the commission to try to deal with that circumstance what does the law say right now can you clarify that unequivocally for us okay um me sorry I just need a a minute um we haven't taken a deep dive into that though I mean to answer that I mean if that's your question. Chair, if I can, real quick. Just while Cindy is going through that, Commissioner Meyer, mahalo for the question. I think just for clarity, staff in our review, anybody can apply for Extreme Diversion Works permit. So that's what we're processing. The analysis and recommendation related to tnc was type the fine whether or not we actually find was tied to the fact that there's traditional customary practice so i want to bifurcate the conversation student version works permits are not only limited to tnc so just making that clear for the record right so anybody can apply for stream diversion works permit but our intent to not fine is because the pre the applicants participate in tnc as well as commercial but based on that that's why we recommend it not finding so that's the context of the tnc i yeah i understand thanks very much cleo um at the same time um what it what it seems is that we we're uh participating in a scheme to break the law and um that whether a fine is issued or not uh the permit comes into question and question of whether a cease and desist order or cease and desist letter is appropriate i'm not trying to be a hard guy or anything i understand the valley out there and understand it pretty well but um i i think we have a duty an irrevocable duty to follow the state code and unless somebody can change the law i don't know are we in a bind here seems like maybe we are as i understand it i i think and I can, what, and I appreciate the clarification from Kaleo, is the traditional customary practices, the question about commercial, is only related to whether we decide to waive the fine or not. And so that's separate from whether, because anybody's entitled to apply for stream diversion permit. So notwithstanding that the GOOTS may be doing commercial activity, I think it's own, the question of traditional customary practices is only related to whether we would waive the fine yeah and i it's ultimately the discretion of this body right to decide whether to deny accept modify a cast condition this is your discretion um and i think you are acting within the context of the water quote to do that i'm sorry commissioner meyer yes yeah are you okay do you have any other questions are you comfortable with no it seems to me uh that uh the question of the permit um and the question of a fine um really is irrelevant given the statements in the code and the laws i understand it as you explained it as a matter of fact so I I I am uncomfortable with this situation um don't like to be in a position as a commissioner to uh to be uh looking the other way if you will and uh and also uh by virtue of that encouraging other people to do the same conduct the same kind of activity so I'm I'm an easy with that and I've been uneasy before and it's uh I don't think it seems like we're really doing our job as far as the law is concerned appreciate that perspective Commissioner my understanding is the goods have applied for the permit and so so I don't think they're trying to violate well it's an after the fact permit but this permit has been pending the application I understand yep all right commissioners do you have any other questions oh Neil commissioner Hannes go ahead thank you uh well certainly uh staff we recognize that we've got a long list of things we need to accomplish in doing our work for this commission. And you want to dispense with items as they come before the board, even though sometimes you don't have perfect information or absolute consensus, census or the matter would be would benefit from Community building that we're really not resourced to to support much more than the current level um and yet I and so we don't want to kick cans down the road where you know we're just not doing our job and making a decision uh with less than perfect information but in this case uh I just think there's some things that would benefit from a little bit more time. And it's not just, as we've said, it's not just for the value of this one permit. It sets some precedents that could be troubling if we move too precipitously. So you've got the SHPTI issue. You've got the commercial use issue. You've got TMK identification issues and questions, which I'm not saying that the concerns are correct or not. It's just that they've been raised today. And I think this, we would really benefit from leaning in a little bit more on this to see if we can sort some of that out and I would say that with respect to the opportunity. For Community building. I guess I kind of said it, it is an opportunity and not just a duty and that opportunity falls, not just to the community itself there are some really reasonable people who have spoken on both sides of this issue here before us today from our community and they're all impressive and i just can you guys just talk and and uh i i hope the meeting works out so the goose can go to uh the meeting that meets regularly on mondays that uh k Moku has talked about. I hope some of this stuff can get sorted. I hope that our Shipki folks can make a site visit. And it seems like we've got some low-hanging fruit that, you know, can be accomplished in a short order. And if things fall out of that, that bring this into, bring us closer to consensus and closer to clarity on the issues and address the concerns about uh precedent setting uh setting precedence that that may produce unintended consequences i think we we better off uh i don't know what how that jams up future schedules of work for the staff or for this the agendas of this commission but it just feels like we would benefit from a little bit more time and seeing this having this come back to us holla for that wisdom commissioner hannes are you proposing a motion i i i'd like to hear staff's response to that uh you know and and then if so, perhaps offer a motion. So I'll start. Hearing the sentiment of the Commission as a decision making body, I'm going to defer and work with the applicants and the community through some of the issues identified. I will say on some of the questions raised about ownership and legal issues, we'll consult with our EGs, but I don't know how long or how fast that's gonna take. And we can coordinate with SHIPTI as well. Again, I had no control over them as a sister agency. So I will say that I am concerned that we're gonna continue to move this out and that the GOODS have been applicants in this process since 2018. And so I just want to acknowledge them for their patience through this process if we do decide to differ. Thank you very much sorry chair did you want me to respond to um commissioner i think it was commissioner uh myers question or do you feel comfortable i mean i can give some general you know some general general information about article 12 second seven it's it's basically it's it's what chair chang said right it's it's reaffirming that the state protects all rights, customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence, right, of cultural and religious purposes and possessed by Ahupuaq tenants for descendants of Native Hawaiian and it goes on. And then just to remind you of the provision in your water code, which is 174C-101, that also talks about Native Hawaiian water rights. And it doesn't really go to this specific issue and Kalero's nodding his head, but it does talk about Native Hawaiian rights. So a deeper dive would be needed to answer your specific question, but I just kind of wanted to give you kind of the framework that the constitutional provision and your own statute provides. Thank you very much, Julie. Cindy. Oh, I'm sorry. Cindy, excuse me. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I know. There's just one big great body that provides this concept. Either Dean or Aaron, did you want to add anything to Commissioner Hannes' summary? Or Kaleo's response? Just that we know that there are unpermitted diversions across the state, not just in Cahoma, but that we are trying to get them on the books as rapidly as possible. And we've been working with the Guths, and they've been patient with us for five years. And they're the ones who are, they've been moving forward the fastest trying to get their use of or the withdrawal of water legal in a sense um but just as mentioned upstream of them or at least four other locations where we have a documented uh water withdrawals from the stream that aren't haven't been issued stream diversion works permits and this is just the permit for them to take water this isn't an allocation of water this isn't a judgment per se just that their use of water is reasonable so that's that's all I wanted to say and just to follow up on that I think it while you know I the goose have been patient and working towards have been grading cooperating to get to this point. I understand that deferring may be a good option just in because of these other issues, you know, these other divers that Aaron mentioned will face similar issues in all likelihood and so yeah to me it makes sense to work through these issues um before we um before we make a dis before you folks make a decision and bring it back to the commission at a future date thank you yeah the issue for instance commercial use of uh I mean that could take a long time so I I'm not sure you're going to get some counsel on that but i'm not sure we want to wait until that's what we totally work that issue through uh but i mean there's an issue here i mean the for the goose benefit i mean we need time to get chipti over there because right now you're looking at a recommendation that requires you to to hire a cultural consultant and that's not necessarily what i've heard you want to do although you can speak for yourself on that issue but so i think there's a benefit to you to have us take this time to work through through some of these issues and if if you're amenable to that unless you see a great hardship uh can you can speak to this issue of a deferral go ahead we're fine with it yes okay we're willing to work with shifty if they're willing to come over yeah we would love them to do a survey our our chair is very persuasive and she seems to she seems to know a guy so uh i think i think uh I think we can make that happen. Chair, I would like to move that we defer item C1. And Kaleo is two months a good, and have it come back to us within two months? It's not an endless thing? I wouldn't put a time frame on it just because some of the issues that you brought up might take longer and I don't know if it's gonna, we can resolve in two months. We can shoot for two months, but so that would be me, right? So again, we won't be looking for perfect information and total resolution of every single issue, but at least let's take care of the low hanging fruit that we can resolve. And if we can defer this matter to address the concerns that have been raised at this hearing and then bring it back to us as soon as practical, practicable. Okay. Motion's been made. Second? Second. Okay. A motion has has been do we have discussion can i just ask one oh go ahead commissioner meyer uh thanks very much neil uh thanks for your help on this i think it's headed in the right direction um you're right and uh that's all good. Kaleo, way to go. I would like to ask that we ask the AG's office for clarity on the question of commercial use. And if possible, on a priority basis, it seems like it's a narrow enough issue at this point that somebody ought to be able to write a memo on that and give us proper legal advice fairly promptly but i don't know it's uh that lies with the ag's office but thanks very much and chair uh that's fine i'll be happy to support this i i would like to condition this resolution on a an opinion from the Deputy AG's office, but I don't think that that's going to make them uncomfortable. So we shan't do that. Thank you. Can I just ask, as a practical matter, pending final approval or action by the Commission, what happens to the existing diversion do they continue to use it not use it we haven't issued a cease and desist so um a lot of that has to do with crops that have already been planted and working with them um you know again you know trying to be flexible with the party that's doing making an effort to comply um if we did do that there would be loss of crops and support so again the from our looking at it holistically the quantity being requested the quantity being used um isn't drying up a stream isn't necessarily affecting downstream users so at this point in time i i'm not, we're not recommending them to stop using water at this point, but that's something that if you wanted to add, no, but no. I mean, there's no doubt that they have been extremely patient and that it is not, they've not intentionally delayed the process. They have been trying very hard to comply and unfortunately we are not government is not moving as quickly as we would all like so to the extent that their status quo where they're continuing to you know those crops so okay i appreciate that answer sure if you wish to have the emotion amended to acknowledge that during this period of deferral the uh the uh goose shall enjoy continued use of the the resource at the current level yeah i think that gives them some certainty i think any questions that people may be attending this you know so, but it puts the impetus on us to move as quickly as possible. To get it sorted out. Yeah. Yes. No, thank you very much, Neil. Okay. And Commissioner Katayama, do you agree with that proposed amendment to the motion? Absolutely. Okay. Seeing no other hands up, I'm going to call for the motion. All in favor, please say aye. Aye. Aye. Okay, I see the hands up from those, Commissioner Hannes, Commissioner Katayama, Commissioner Kagawa viviani commissioner meyer and commissioner seto and here we have two hands up as well so there's a unanimous approval wait that was for deferral yes for deferral okay with the condition that um the goods can continue to use at at pending return to this commission. Just wanted to make sure that was clear on the record. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, no, no, no, no. And you sort of set the tone Commissioner Kagawa-Viviani by suggesting that earlier. So with that being said, the motion has been passed unanimously. We greatly appreciate the GOODS for attendance or and zoom and for all of those other testifiers who submitted comments both in writing and orally thank you very much for um participating we are going to take a we're going to come back at 12 15. we're going to take a little lunch break oh 1 15 1 15. we're going to take a lunch break so um we are in recess thank you oh wait wait wait commissioner yes yes um chair i have another meeting at 1 30 so may i be excused from returning at 1 15. are you going to hand it off to somebody else no i'm just no, no. Thank you very much. I appreciate you letting us know that. All right. We are. We are in recess right now. Thank you. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Thank you. we're reconvening the water commission hearing um thank you i apologize for for being tardy so the next item on the agenda is item c2 yeah chair uh dean ueno is going to present all right uh good afternoon commissioners dean Ueno with the Commission Stream Protection and Management Branch. Here to present on submittal item C2 is approval of stream channel alteration permit application SCAP 5955.3 by the State of Hawaii Department of Transportation. The project is proposing to widen the Kalihi Stream Bridge on the ocean side of the H1 highway and affect approximately 14 linear feet of the east and west bank wall to accommodate the extended bridge abutments and foundations. The details are in the submittal. and I just want to note that we did not receive a comment letter from State Historic Preservation Division. We did, however, receive comments from the Division of Aquatic Resources and the Division of Horses and Wildlife, and so their comments are reflected in the recommendation. So if I may, I'll jump straight to the recommendation. The Commission approved stream channel alteration permit SCAP 5955.3, application subject to the standard conditions in Exhibit 4 and the special conditions outlined below. A, approval is subject to SHPDE concurrence. If SHPDE requires conditions, authority shall be delegated to the Deputy Director to attach those as a condition of the stream channel alteration permit. In conformance with the Hawaii Division of Aquatic Resources recommendations, the permittee shall ensure streamflow connectivity around the project site at all times with no more than 50% of the stream channel being diverted around the project area to enable O'opu and Opai passage, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2, is the dark comment letter. And the applicant shall contact the Division of Aquatic Resources should unforeseen events pose a potential threat to the aquatic environment. In conformance with the Hawaii Division of Ocean and Wildlife Recommendations, the permittee shall seek to minimize impacts in any species, utilize native plant species for landscaping, and prevent the introduction and spread of invasive species. And the letter from the Division of Forestry and Wildlife is attached to Exhibit 3. Other than that, staff stands on its submittal, and I'm available if you have any questions. Thank you very much, Dean. Commissionersers do we have any questions of staff i don't see any um do we have anybody in the waiting room to testify on this matter okay is that maya maya yeah yeah mia akipa please go ahead, Mia unmute yourself. Hi, good afternoon, commissioners. I'm Mia Akiba with Jacobs Engineering, and I'm an environmental planner, and I prepare this permit application. I don't really have anything to add unless there's any questions, um i am in agreement with the conditions of the permit please does anyone have any questions i just have a quick comment that it was um it's kind of nice to know that there's O'opu, Akupa and, shoot, which, you know, other native aquatic animals that can handle Klihi stream. That's an excellent point. Any other questions move to approve item c2 do i have a second time oh and the motion has been seconded by commissioner kagawa viviani um any discussion okay call for the motion all in favor of the staff submittal recommendations say aye i see hands raised by commissioner hannes commissioner katayama commissioner meyer are you here oh he should be on. Commissioner Meyer? One, two, three. We have quorum. Okay. Commissioner Chang, aye vote aye. So there is a approval by five commissioners. Thank you very much. And thank you, Mia, for being available. Yes, thank you very much and thank you Mia for being available yes thank you very much thank you thank you very much dean the next is we're going to go back to item b2 so do I have a we need a motion do I have a, we need a motion. Do I have a motion to go into executive session? Yes, I move to go into executive session to address item B2. Do I have a second? Second. Motion has been seconded, made and seconded. All in favor? Okay, any opposed? Okay okay we are now going into executive session um do we need to physically move um yeah i think the way that we're gonna do it um we'll stay here if you we can take it from your office or the three of you um and then we will make a breakout room for the commissioners to join you, and you can join from your phone or chairs computer. Okay, yeah, are you even help with the break down? Are you going to do it? Is is is is this? Is this none of... you you you you Thank you. Terima kasih. Thanks. you you you Thank you. I think it's clear. No, they're not there. Darlene, are you setting up the breakouts? Hi, we're trying to set up the breakouts. Oh yeah, you have to tinker with the settings. So we'll be in contact in a sec. Okay. Okay. Uh-oh. You are... I think I'm going to turn the break over. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Thank you. okay Are you in the main session, Neil? Yes. Okay, good. I see you. We made it back, and Paul's here too, so all right. And I see a bunch of other people, so I think we did good. All right. I'm going to step away for a second. We might end the meeting without you, Paul. Thank you. um We're still here. Okay. Are we discussing anything? Sorry, we can't hear. Oh, okay, sorry. Yeah, no, I'm so sorry. No wonder we were disconnecting. But so- Okay, let me do that announcement again. Sorry. I apologize, the mute button was not unmuted. So back in session, just an update to the commissioner's announcement from our side. Jeremy Kimura will be, his last days days this Friday he's transitioning into a new space in in the work he's doing around water so just wishing him the best in his future endeavors and that's just an update from from our side for the commission thank you for that we well I appreciated his presentation today so next item on the agenda is the commission schedule so we have a meeting I think hello you mentioned the third the third Tuesdays of every month is when we're trying to set the schedule consistent schedule once in a while those dates may change but the next one is scheduled third week in Aprilil and and i think i may have mentioned this it's i'm i don't think i'm violating sunshine but um we will be using i i would like and i've talked to kalei about this as as like with the land board it's using our water commission meetings because it is open to the public and sunshine for informational updates on whether they're updates from the Navy on Red Hill, whether they're updates on the water management plans. So we will be so please review your agenda and they will be non action items. Sometimes we will be using these informational updates on a potentially challenging issue but we'll do an we'll do an up informational meeting first and then the next month we'll do decision making so I am trying to manage both public provide the community opportunities to participate in our process as well as provide us opportunity to make an informed decision making. All right. With that, is there any other further business before the Water Commission? It is. Leading is adjourned. Mahalo. Mahalo. Mahalo. Thank you. Mahalo. Aloha. Aloha. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello.