 we'll let them in once we get all right you know I'm still not coming up on YouTube yet. Hello? Yeah, Chair and Cleo, I'd like to take just a second to say uh big mahalo thank you so much for your part and the staff's part aaron dean ryan katie everybody in the uh nars extension for the uh west maui watershed preserve the nars grant of three million dollars a year was extended for another six years which is just fabulous it's a wonderful preserve and a just a great resource for maui thank you so much that's just a it was uh just a wonderful wonderful thing to see it cruise through so well and it just clearly had the right support thanks so much oh you're welcome it's good projects feel good projects all right um okay youtube is good so you can start recording and then share your ready people yeah here you go. Okay, a little my cock hole. My name is Don Chang, share of the of the Board of Land and Natural Resources, and share of the commission of the Water Commission. This is May sixteenth, 2,023 meeting of the Commission on Water Resource Management. It is 9.06. We are holding this meeting as a hybrid meeting. Some of us are in person and will be hearing in the Kalani Moko building boardroom in Honolulu. And we are also holding this meeting remotely via zoom and can be watched live on youtube for those who are here to testify in zoom we will let you into the meeting when we will be hearing the item you wish to testify on please remember to turn off your youtube when you are in the main zoom meeting room or we will get an echo when you enter please be sure to keep your camera off and the microphone muted until the commission calls on you for public testimony we ask that members of the public testifying on the agenda items limit your testimony to three minutes so that we can get to hear everyone. Please be mindful of everyone. And again, if you can limit your testimony. Please remember not to use the chat for any comments because that presents a sunshine issue. Please also testify via, you may also testify via telephone at the number posted online. Please let the Commission Secretary know your name and what agenda item you wish to testify on so we can call you for that item. You can also email your testimony via email to nadine.h.pomroy at hawaii.gov or to dlnr.seaworm at hawaii.gov or to dnr.seaworm at hawaii.gov. For all meeting participants, I would like to stress the importance of speaking slowly and clearly and directly into your microphone. Before speaking, please state your name and identify yourself for the record. I am going to read the standard contested case statement. I thought I was going to read it. Ah, I found it. Okay. In some of the matters before the Commission, a person may wish to request a contested case hearing if such a request is made before the commission's decision then the commission will consider the request first before considering the merits of the item before it a person who wants a contested case may also wait until the commission decides the issue then request a contested case after the decision it is up to you any request must be made orally by the end of the meeting and followed up in writing within 10 days if no request for a contested case hearing is made the commission will make a decision the department will treat the decision as final and proceed accordingly i will now take roll call i will now ask the commissioners to introduce themselves and if they are participating remotely please state where whether anyone is in the room with you i'll first go to Mike Buck. Hello, Michael Buck. Neil? Neil Hannes. I'm alone in my office. Wayne Katayama. Hi, good morning. I'm alone here. I'm here to ask you to please introduce yourself and your name. hello my uh neil hannes i'm alone in my office wayne katayama hi good morning i'm alone here it sounds so sad i'm alone here it is it is i look forward to when we are all together paul good morning um i i i am also in my office all alone joanna good morning joanna sito i am alone in my office very good thank you again and present are our staff we have deputy khalil manuel um we also have nadine pomroy our commission secretary and deputy attorney general julie chino so we have no items that have been requested to be moved up so we will follow the agenda the first item on the agenda is approval of the minutes of April 18, 2003. Nadine, have we received any written comments on the minutes? It was edited. No. I have minor corrections, non-substantive. Okay. minor um corrections non-substantive okay yeah um any other comments anybody in the audience wanting to make a comment on our minutes seeing none commissioners um do i have a motion move approval Okay, there's been a motion to approve and second the April 18, 2,023 with some minor non-substantive comments made by Commissioner Kagawa Viviani. All in favor. I think first one. Okay, let's do a roll call um maybe could you please do the roll call okay commissioner buck hi commissioner hannes hi commissioner kagawa viviani Aye. Commissioner Katayama? Aye. Commissioner Meyer? Aye. Commissioner Sato? Aye. Chair Tannen. Aye. The motion has been unanimously approved. Let's move on to agenda item, action items B1, which is the approval of a stream diversion works permit application and special conditions, East Maui Irrigation Company, LLC. Hello? So chair, Dean Ueno will be presenting this item for the commission. Very good. Dean? Good morning commissioners, Dean Ueno with the commission stream protection and management branch uh on item agenda uh agenda item b1 and this is for approval of stream diversion works permit uh application sdwp.5990.6 along with special conditions for east mile irrigation company llc and note this is for modifications of stream diversion numbers 215 185 308 196 and 194 to fix leaks and provide habitat connectivity on lava Kailua Puola and streams in East Maui and we're also asking that you declare that the project is exempt from environment and environmental assessment uh requirements under uh hrs chapter 343 and har chapter 11-200.1 um the commission staff stands on its on its testimony or exceeding on its submittal and i'm going to jump right to the recommendations and read that for the record um the staff is asking that the commission, number one, approve stream diversion works permit application SDWP.59906.6, submitted by East Maui Irrigation Company LLC that proposes to modify diversion 215 on the Hoʻolawa stream, diversion 185 on the Kailua stream, diversions 308 and 196 on the Oʻopola Stream, and Diversion 194 on Ka'aea Stream to fix leaks and provide habitat connectivity subject to the standard conditions in Exhibit 4 and the special conditions below. Diversion 215 on the Ho'olawa Stream is in the Special Management Area, or SMA, District and subject to regulation by the County of Maui Planning Department. So issuance of this permit shall be subject to a determination whether an SMA district and subject to regulation by the county Maui planning department. So issuance of this permit shall be subject to the determination whether an SMA permit is required. If not required, the applicant shall provide evidence of consultation with the Maui planning department. If an SMA is required, the applicant shall provide a copy of the SMA permit prior to issuance of the Stream Diversion Works permit. In conformance with the Division of Aquatic Resources recommendations incorporated by reference in exhibit one the best management practices or bmps should be implemented in the sdwp that help to minimize the impacts of the water on the water quality parameters in the aquatic environment and maintain stream flow at all times these bmps include one passage through the stream remain unimpeded at all times. All sediment, silt, chemicals, debris, or any other byproducts of the demolition and construction are minimized and contained to the greatest extent possible. Schedule work activities during periods of minimal rainfall and in stream working low or no flow stream flow conditions, and for minimize disturbance and impacts to stream channel bottom and its substrate, such as cobbles and borders, as much as possible as these are essential components of the habitat for the native stream biota. Item 1C, modification of diversions are subject to SHPDI, or State Historic Preservation Division concurrence. If SHPDI requires conditions, we ask that it be delegated to the Deputy Director to attach those conditions as of abandonment. D, in conformance with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service recommendations incorporated by reference in Exhibit 3, the permittee shall 1. Implement plant avoidance and minimization measures identified if any work would occur in the nearby terrestrial areas, and 2. Employ applicable best management practices for any in-water work. E, when the use of heavy machinery may be required in stream, the permittee shall employ the appropriate BMPs and conduct work only during low flow conditions to minimize impacts to water quality. And item two, declare that the project is exempt from EA requirements under HRS Chapter 343 and HAR Chapter 11-200.1. And that concludes staff's presentation. Thank you very much, Dean. Commissioners, do you have any questions for staff? Dean, I have one. When did the letter to SHPD, when was that sent? Let me see. So usually, sorry, while I'm pulling that up, typically the commission staff, once we receive the application deemed that it's complete, we will forward an acknowledgement letter to the applicant stating that the application has been received. And so that initiates the review process by the agencies. Along with that, we send a letter back to the applicant regarding our findings on the finding that no historic sites would be impacted. And so that letter went out on March 3rd, 2023. Are they the only agency that did not submit a response? No. So starting on page… We said we're awaiting one. Yeah, starting on page 9, when we send that acknowledgement letter, that also initiates the agency review process. And so, starting on page 9, all the agencies that are listed there also received letters notifying them of the availability of the application on our website and so no comments were received from department of Hawaiian homelands division of forestry and wildlife land division state parks office of Hawaiian affairs army corps of engineers and no public comments were received but SHPD is required to provide a concurrence yes and um typically what it's just because of their backlog um in in responding um and so usually uh we will receive their comments after the fact or concurrence um after um after the commission's decision? Well, this is almost two months to ten weeks. That's a long time. If they don't... I need to be a little careful. I would like them to be more timely because others are waiting for responses. Yeah, I believe they have been getting better. They switched over to a new system. Hi, Chris. And so I think that has been, you know, as both agencies and the general public has been getting accustomed to how to use it i think their times have been the response times have been gradually increasing that is my sense too i think i would just ask that um one week before our meetings in the future if we do not receive a response a concurrence letter from, could we please send them a reminder and ask them, if we don't get a response, could they please appear at our commission meeting to explain to us why they haven't received, why they haven't provided a timely response? Can't do that. I see Michael. Michael Buck, your hand is up. Oh, yeah, thank you, Dean. There's some substantial comments from the Sierra Club. Do you care to address any of those now or wait till to the presentation? No, it's a Oh, Joanna, your hand is up. Thank you. There's on page 2 of the submittal gallons page three um is there also precipitation for the um the IAS stream and then the last one is um this sorry the clean water branch does have updated standard comments. And maybe in the future, can refer to that one. We're looking at possibility of a water quality certification requirement for these diversions and work in streams. And if I'm not mistaken, if that is subject to Army Corps? Correct. Yes. Which I believe, and I think EMI can answer that better, where they're at in that process of getting a determination from Army Corps. Thank you. Thank you. Any other questions from the commissioners? If not, the okay, there's a few things. Do we have someone in particular from the applicant that would like is Ken? Are you gonna speak on behalf of the applicant? Yes. Good morning, Chair Chang. Is now appropriate time? Yes, please go ahead. Okay. Aloha, Chair Chang, honorable commissioners. My name is Ken Kawahara with Akinakan Associates. And also joining me today is Roy Hardy, one of our senior project engineers. We're here representing EMI, the applicant for items B1 and B2. So with your approval, I'd like to speak on both of those items rather than repeat myself for item B2. And we're here today seeking approval of the stream diversion works permits for the implementation of the work needed to comply with the Hualo Stream Interim Entry and Flow Standards decisions made by the Commission in November of last year. Let me first emphasize that EMI understands the importance of the Commission's decision and recognizes the need to implement the IIFS decisions in a timely manner. EMI has complied in this manner with all of the permit application deadlines set as part of the commission's November 2022 action, which leads us to where we are today, staff's review of the initial 13 priority permit applications and its resulting recommendations. I'd like to note that there are additional 14 modifications coming to the commission for action, and they are not covered by today's hearing. There was a written testimony submitted by EMI, and I just like to highlight some of the major policy issues. The other comments in the written testimony address some of the corrected stream names and TMK numbers. First of all, is a recommendation by staff for the complete removal of some of the diversions. The permanent removal of diversions is not necessary to achieve compliance with the interim interim stream flow standards decision made by the Commission. By its very definition, an interim interim flow standard is not permanent and can be changed in the future. While EMI is completely in accord with the need to abandon the use of the diversions to comply with the IFS, that is completely different from abandoning the structure itself in perpetuity. Removal of such structures will only cause additional and unnecessary environmental impacts, not to mention the additional impacts if that diversion were ever to be reinstated in the future as part of another interim In-Stream Flow Standard decision made by a future Commission. We recognize that the Division of Aquatic Resources has a policy that abandoned diversion should require the removal of the diversion structures and the return of the stream to its natural condition as possible. However, we think this policy has to be applied on a case-by-case basis, and it should only be applied to permanent abandonments, which this is not meant to be. If this is not a permanent abandonment, the environmental costs of removing the structure and potentially someday replacing it should be assessed, as should the identification of alternatives that will meet the IIFS order without permanent removal of the infrastructure further the impact to the structural integrity of the water system should also be assessed bottom line this should not be a uniform policy applied to every IIFS decision across the state lastly we'd just like to note as highlighted in the staff's recommendation that the permits, even if approved by the Commission today, are subject to further reviews and potential conditions requirements by other county, state and federal agencies, and I think that was mentioned just previously before I testified. Thus, any timeline for complete envision today should be could be impacted and delayed should other regulatory reviews call for additional studies and permitting we appreciate this opportunity opportunity comment and will be available to answer any questions that the commission may have thank you thank you very much ken um did roy or anyone else from the applicant want to say anything before we open it up for questions uh none for me thank you thank you yes okay with that um commissioners i'm open for any questions you may have for the applicant i have do you have i have a i have a question ken this is dawn um so are you suggesting that the removal of the stream diversions triggers a chapter 343 review? I think that depends on what the commission decides. Not knowing what the commission may decide. I would say that, and maybe the point I'm trying to make or the applicant is trying to make is that permanent removal of the diversions is not necessary to comply with the IIFS. And you never know when things may change in the future. And maybe an example is, for example, the Koala Ditch. You know, part of the ditch was damaged by the landslides. It was repaired and another landslide occurred, I believe in 2020. And my understanding, and it was in the news, that the legislature has appropriated quite a large sum of money to try to repair the ditch moving forward. So if those diversions were permanently abandoned and demolished, you know, you never know when things may change in the future. And just looking at yesterday's newspaper, the Star Advertiser, it talks about the University of Hawaii launching an initiative to advance local food production. So what we're really talking about water for, you know, not only domestic use, but also for agriculture. You know, a future commission may may say, hey, you know what? You know, there's a possibility that we want to look at modifying the interim interim flow standards so i'm just you know, trying to caution the Commission that you know we understand and abiding by the ifs that was set but permanent removal of the actual diversion is not necessary to comply with the ifs. DENISE GLUHANI- Michael. DENISE GLUHANI- Michael first and then Neil. This is more a comment. This is from the actual words from our East Maui decision. Our decision will necessitate significant reductions in off-stream diversions. In many streams we are recommending no diversions of either base or total flow. While our order specifically identifies the desired streamflow expected, we recognize that a universal remedy to modify or remove diversions is not practical. At this time, the commission overall guidance is not to remove diversion instructions if modifications can achieve desired results. I just want to provide that for context for subsequent discussions okay um neil your hand was up and then i'm going to take a look and then paul as i look at the photos in the submittal i'm looking at some infrastructure that may not last forever uh and if we don't take them out now remove them out now do they continue to uh deteriorate and really create and ultimately the the use for which you're you're holding them in some at some unknown future date they're really not they're really not prepared to to meet those needs so i guess ken what i'm looking for is what's your rating of the life of this infrastructure i mean it's it's served us well for a century uh how much more do you think it's gonna last? It just depends. Some is by age, some is by condition. I wouldn't say that there's a rating scale that we do have, but in working with the staff of the Water Commission, for example, there was a diversion where the staff recommended removal of pipes, but not demolishing the dam or the embankment and um just to be frank we're a little bit surprised and seeing the submittal that um it kind of changed and i think you know further discussion is necessary um but um i would say that there are certain things like removal of pipes would do less damage than actually going there with heavy equipment and trying to hammer out that embankment where water can flow over it now. But on the other hand, in terms of your surprise, Ken, I mean, isn't it fairly standard in leases that the improvements that you put up on the land during the term of your use have to be removed when the when you return it um it depends i i mean i'm not an expert on the land side but in billinar i've seen where the land division has that option if the um if the lessee does not want to remove them improvements that sometimes they they value their improvements and would like to keep it so Dean my I surmise that uh this is not the first time this discussion is being is occurring and that their feeling is that uh these have no use of future value or use for us um I mean it's hard to say, right? Depending on, again, as they did note in their comments that this is an interim flow standard. Understandably, I think we went through the same thing in the East Maui contest case hearing hearing where um do the should these as mr as commissioner buck noted uh should these diversions be removed or not um i think you know that may have been an oversight on our part um being that one submittal was for modification and one one submittal was was for diversion um and noting a division of aquatic resources comments that about these about the two diversions um let's see Dean maybe if I can jump in yep go ahead so I think um what would be helpful is uh model can for the testimony but I think let's take them one at a time the first item is specifically about modifications so in that the recommendations there is no recommendation for complete approval unless i'm missing it so what his testimony is referring to is i don't need to and maybe we should address b2 when we get there because it's con it's co-mingling the issues right now before you our recommendations to modify which doesn't say removal of the diversion it just is modified to meet the ifs so i think that would be helpful if we just take them item by item because the issues that are raised in akinaka's or uh emi's testimony is more reflective item b2 okay you would agree ken yes yes and thank you thank you for clarifying khalil okay very good very good aurora did you want to did you have a question i'll hold it for b2 okay then let's go let's let's any questions on b1 um i am now going to open it for public comments. I do see there's a David Kimo Frankel and is Tiare Lawrence also on the call. So, Mr. Frankel, go ahead. Thank you. Good morning, David Frankel here on behalf of the Sierra Club. We submitted a written testimony. And I'll try to isolate this to just be one and talk about b2 a little later um you know we are concerned that we're not receiving information in a timely manner and so i my understanding from the water commission's decision back in november that emi has submitted to you you a timeline to implement other system modifications. We, I want to reiterate, we would like to see that. It's not posted on Sea Worm's website and we would like to receive that so that we can provide you timely information early. One of the conditions that we would like to see that has been triggered by prior modifications that have been made is notification to residents on the day on which, prior to the day that it's occurring, that people are notified. So if people are going to be in a stream, they will know that a stream is going to be impounded and the water released. That is, it is a very dangerous situation that has occurred in the past. So we would like to have some sort of notification to residents, either mailing all the residents or putting a sign on the road, something so that people know when these modifications are being made. And that's really important from just a public safety perspective. Our second major concern has to do with the berms and lips that are suggested. When we talked to Aaron prior to the November Seaworm meeting, he told us that the modification to the grates was going to be that the metal sheet, whatever the word is, was going to be put on the grates at a slightly lower elevation. So the water would naturally flow there first rather than the higher up in the gates. But instead of doing that, AMI is proposing, I suppose, a cheaper solution, which is to put these berms in place. And we object to that for a couple of reasons. One, aesthetically, they're just ugly. Two, we don't think they're going to work effectively. Particularly, they're vulnerable when the high volumes of rain occur and water rushes down, those berms are going to be knocked away and the mitigation ineffective. So we would like what Dr. Stroud discussed and proposed, and it's in our November testimony. We said we applauded that, and it gave us comfort. But to see Emi completely changing course on this is is alarming. Specifically specific concerns. whole lava stream which is depicted. I think that's the first diversion depicted in the staff submittal um the the um sluice gate hasn't been there since 2018 at least and that's five years and nobody they if they're gonna put a slew skate back they need to have a uh apply for a permit and that's apparently what they've done they They're shoehorning the seaworms order to modify the structure to allow more water to go down to put in a new sluice gate. That's completely not appropriate. That needs to be dealt with separately. The effect of putting a sluice gate in would be to raise the amount of water that is essentially impounded before it can flow downstream. That's the antithesis of what was in your folks' order. In addition, you folks need to know that the way it is now, with or without the sluice gate, poses a drowning hazard, a significant one. Just upstream from there is a very nice well-used uh swimming hole and when waters are high when they come up to sort of the top of the concrete dam what it would there's an incredible current that's going to drag someone one day down through that hole underwater and that should not um uh that that situation should not be there. That concrete lip or whatever you want to call it needs to be taken out so that there's a channel. Yeah, someone could be swept downstream, but at least it's not going to be swept completely underwater where they're going to, anyway, it's's a hazard needs to be fixed. Let's see here. The photos that have been provided to you, I believe, did not come and things that need to be removed from the area. I'll just, you have a written testimony. I'll leave it at that. It would help matters a lot if these kinds of issues were discussed in the quarterly meetings that are happening now um uh i don't know why this we had a short time um for the last meeting but this kind of thing is exactly why we need the quarterly meeting so these issues can be hashed out before coming to you thank you thank you very much. Do we have any other public comment? Public test? Okay, no others commissioners. Okay, i'm sorry I just like to note for the record, and I just realized that that the Emi written testimony was mislabeled so actually b2 should actually be b1 and b1 should actually be b2 so i apologize i just realized it okay commissioners aurora okay commissioner meyer uh yes chair thanks very much um a question please uh for emi um it sounds like emi is ready to proceed with this work immediately and i saw in the in the uh submittals that uh there was an estimate of about six months to have the majority of these things completed. Is that, does that still hold? That sounds pretty quick, which is just great because you get these in-stream flows, interim in-stream flows up and running and have this situation restored. But what is the timing right now, assuming there are no further delays? Commissioner Meyer, I would have to defer to the actually EMI folks, and I think they're also available. But before that, maybe if I could just reiterate, it kind of depends on what the decision is and what times the permitting is um the the maybe the the thing that takes but quite a while um but the actual work may not be that long but um we have mark vought also um on the on the call so he could answer that question thank you ken i understand how the scope and verbiage of the permits can affect the duration mark uh what do you think oh good morning chair chang yeah commissioners um yeah no i think the timeline we'd put for executing the construction of this would be six months to a year i think that was what we had originally put down um but the permitting you know permitting time and weather is always that's always the toss-up yeah um just depending about how soon we can get permits and weather is always, that's always the toss up, yeah. Just depending about how soon we can get permits and weather permitting, again, I think it's important to note that, you know, those are obstructions to the construction. Thank you. I guess it's good we're heading into a drier season at this point. Aurora. In terms of the work. I have a question for Dr. Strzok or stream protection and management. It's a lot of technical information. I was wondering if a couple of things, given the testimony from Sierra Club and some of the comments from East Maui, when is the next meeting? It sounds like this was not brought up in the existing structures for dialogue. And I don't wanna, last thing I wanna do is like, I've seen the diversions for three minutes. You know, we don't wanna be micromanaging it from Honolulu. So like what happened last meeting and when is the next opportunity for hashing out some of these understandings i'm sorry i'm trying to i try to call the exact date of the last meeting but um you know i think being our first meeting given that this responsibility to host these quarterly meetings transferred from basically transferred from us to um from land division to to the commission um that this being our first meeting was really kind of more just um getting to understand who um the players were and and um you know um kind of getting updates from all the participating agencies and the general public. So, yeah, as I mentioned earlier, we sent out the acknowledgement letter on March 3rd to East Maui Irrigation Company for the two diversions. We had the East Maui quarterly meeting two weeks later. So at that time, the applications were available on our website and it was mentioned during the meeting that the applications had been submitted. So I apologize that it was an oversight on our part that we didn't specifically go into the nature of the applications, but really that wasn't the focus of the meeting at the time. It was kind of just our first meeting and kind of an orientation to get to to know one another um in that space so the next one um it so the plan right now is to hold it every three months so the next one is on June 15th June 16th current about 15th sorry sorry. And if it helps too, Erin does have some photos for each of the diversions and can kind of walk through each of the proposed modifications for each one. You know, maybe given the feedback from testimony and my poor memory, it would be helpful to understand how the November decisions tie to the recommendations, you know, just the logical flow and to understand the rationales, because I think you've given a lot of thought to all of this and worked a lot and have spent a lot of time, but I think we just, we're not there with you. And I think the more everybody understands, maybe the more people feel themselves in the solution so um so let me um if i can call on dr ernstrock to um provide some photos and walk through that um connections and and also just to note in the submittal um if you the logic we tried to put the logic there above the diversion so it shows what was discussed in november in the first box and then the proposed modification to show this is what we meant this is what's being proposed if there is more crosswalking or further clarification then let's go through that right let's take some time to walk through to make sure you feel comfortable with what's being recommended and acted on yeah okay thank you uh dr kagawa viviani aaron struck with the stream protection and management branch i'm going to try my best to walk through the recommendations i was not the author of this middle so i apologize for not knowing every detail of it. But I will start with H7 or Division 215 on Hau'alava Stream at Haiku Ditch. Hau'alava Stream, to give you a little bit of background, the management goal was to increase flows in the stream to provide for recreational riparian uses and downstream aquatic habitat. The stream has an estuary that increases recruitment to the lower reaches. However, there are some substantial overhanging bedrock lips following the rejuvenation phase of the Hana Volcanics that flowed down slope. So at the Wailoa, New Hamakua, and Lowry ditches, we have made recommendations to increase the base flow in the stream. And we would like that base flow to remain in the stream past the haiku ditch so at this location at the haiku ditch the goal was not to discontinue the use of the diversion into the ditch but to keep all of that flow that we've restored upstream in the stream to provide for those riparian recreational and aquatic ecosystem values so in order to do that you have to understand how the diversion was constructed the intake the ditch is in a tunnel underneath the stream and the intake is on the right bank here and there is a gravel or a trash rack or right in front of it which is this concrete wall and from a different angle right here the stream itself is dammed up and acts as the gravel trap to keep material out of the tunnel. The tunnel is difficult to maintain, and as much as possible, the design was to keep debris, whether it's rocks, sticks, leaves, you name it, out of the tunnel. the last five years as noted that would be lowered water would pool up behind this dam and then spill into the intake through the pukas that are in this trash act so you can see all of these little tunnels or these little holes in order to keep all of that water that we've restored upstream in the stream, the goal would is to lower the invert of this dam and seal these puccas so that the base flow remains in the stream and goes downstream. If water were released via the sluice gate, then definitely there would be a potential hazard where people recreating in this pool might get trapped. design for all of the flow will that is restored to the stream will remain flowing through the notch that is proposed in the design here um the dam itself is built into the bridge you can see the bridge piers here and uh this watershed, the whole of a new tributary captures a decent amount of high flow events or big runoff events that that result in large flows through this section. But all of the low flows will remain in the stream going through that notch. Are there any questions so yeah on the submittal it should be construct 45 inch wide by three inch okay it's just a typo there invert or notch sorry it just the the submittal seems a little incomplete i guess in that or i'm not understanding terminology so yeah Aaron if you can refer to the submittal page proposed action action number four the yellow hatched lines is what would be cut out of the wall to create that invert correct yes so that yellow hatching is the window with which all of the low flows will continue downstream. So the lowest point in that window is the invert of the stream if we seal all of the pucas in the trash rack. Got it. Yeah. It helps to have you walk us through yes a whole lot yeah okay so Aaron has submitted having heard the concerns of Earth Justice and the rep uh and Ken on behalf on behalf of uh EMI you're satisfied that what we presented here in the in the submittal uh is is still recommended notwithstanding the concerns that may have been raised correct i believe that in order to retain all of the restored flow in the stream we need to notch out the dam and allow that flow downstream. And this allows for EMI to divert some of those higher flow events. But obviously they're never going to take a large portion of it because those high flow events exceed the maximum capacity intake by 10 20 fold so it's just the you know small portion of those high flow events will be able to be diverted and all of those low flows will remain in the stream and and in this case we're allowing infrastructure to remain in place and we're you we're adapting it to our multiple purposes yes thank you aaron do you want to continue are we okay i think we should just walk through each of them so the commissioners know exactly what's being proposed but i do appreciate khalil the um the presentation the logic yeah the logic so it does refer to the sea worm recommendation specifically the november one and what was recommended and how this action is consistent so correct okay yeah we want to make sure that we are in alignment with the orders the commission gave in november and then if we're not then this is the time to actually make any modifications or recommendations. So we are consistent with that intent. Okay. Very good. Okay. So this is Wailoa Intake 15 or Diversion 185, Kailua Stream at Wailoa Ditch. I apologize for not reviewing EMI's drawings. Very clearly, I was more focused on the language. But their drawings don't do what we were proposing justice. They're a little bit crude to to say the least the the diversion itself is a great that captures all of the low flows and the goal was to create a a bridge or a put in a plate that retains the base flow across the intake and provides for downstream recreational usage and the mechanism proposed was um by me I believe was to put a metal grate across it but I believe filling in the pucas with concrete and um rebar may also uh meet that intent but the the need really is to create a little berm on the upstream side so that it ensures all those low flows continue across that bridge. Now, in the staff submittal, the berm is huge. And my recommendation was something along the lines of this is the bridge across the intake, and there's a little, I don't know if the bridge across the intake and there's a little, I don't know if you can see that, but there's a little lip here. In other locations, just a little bit, you know, two or three inches of concrete would work and it would get the water, this is before the concrete's poured, but it would get the water flowing over the intake downstream. So again, I apologize. The staff submittal doesn't do the design justice, but very little concrete would be used and it would not impede the visual aesthetics, in my opinion, and it would would withstand. We've seen these you know concrete over tens of years is gonna get damaged, but it would withstand damage,, a few inches at most berm to make sure all of those low flows continue across the intake downstream. So Aaron, real quick, just before we continue, the proposed modifications is a three inch by 30 inch wide metal plate. So would you recommend that the berms also be three inches high so we can just add that clarification language install three inch berms as long as it meets the intent of um the amount of water flowing downstream i mean there's you the amount of water that the plate can carry is dependent on how wide it is how wide the channel is at that point i mean i'm confident they have the engineers to do the design um i you know they as long as the interim and stream flow standard is met by the design and we can verify that in the field so okay aaron those those grates look like they've been there a while um do they factor into any of our our uh goals or objectives for that stream i i don't understand that question. I get where low flow is going to go through that. We're creating a system where the low flow will stay in the stream, which is an objective. But during high flow, those big grates like that, pretty much everything dumps into the diversion then, right? A portion of it i mean the when you get the flows that so kailua watershed goes up i don't know eight seven thousand feet in elevation maximum elevation some are some are pretty substantial up on haleakala there are some big storm events that flow through this stream channel and in no way does this intake capture um much of those high flow events uh but you know it will capture those medium flow events um so is that well yeah yeah I I I think you've addressed the point that I raised. I didn't quite raise all the point as well as I wanted to. That doesn't look like best practice. It doesn't look like the kind of stuff we want in our stream long term. Aren't there better grading systems now that allow water to flow over as well as into diversions and so forth? And this stuff is just going to break apart over time as it continues to deteriorate is this the moment that we use to see an upgrade of that or is that irrelevant to the purposes of the action the question whether this current design is going to deteriorate over time i i can refer to emi in terms of the age which or the the longevity of the the structure i don't know when this was last replaced um but i would assume decades if not many decades um maybe emi can comment on the age of which these structures are at at this point. Yeah, I apologize, but I don't know the exact age of these, but they are long before I started, which was roughly 30 years ago. And I know that these are, you know, 50 plus years old, if not more. So our recommendation would just leave them as is at this point. The the structure outside of the low flow channel. I believe, yeah, Emi repairs as needed. We don't micromanage repairs like this. So the feeling is it's a bit of an overreach for the, our, the in stream flows standard which is kind of the focus of our action to kind of leverage some improvements here that would make this a more modern system. I don't know what you mean by modern. The this intake in particular has a control mechanism, if i'm correct mark that when the why low a ditch flows exceed a certain capacity. It automatically closes a radial gate that discharges the water into the new Hamakua ditch. So it's it's a pretty cool design I don't Okay, thank you, Chair. Okay, I will go to so oh, pool a stream at Spreckles ditch. The may refer to the submittal the this the photograph in the submittal is a little misleading and the location of the concrete lip is on the wrong side. This is a downstream view looking at the intake. This is the right bank. Left bank is covered in how bush, as you can see, there are these small little wing walls, and there's a great in where water drops through. This is looking upstream. This is looking from the rightverted at the Spreckels ditch intake so in order to do that we need to somehow bridge this grate and that was envisioned to be similar to the Kailua ditch in that a some sort of metal plate or sealant would go across the intake to transport all of those low flows and therefore some sort of little berm on the upstream lip to get all of that water across the whole structure at all. These wing walls, they've been around for many decades, I would presume, and small concrete structures will last in this environment if they're designed appropriately. So that is the goal of this stream management wise was to increase the availability of aquatic habitat downstream, specifically downstream of the center ditch, but also downstream of the speckles ditch to increase habitat availability. So, Aaron, just real quick, based on the recommended proposed action in the submittal. Is there any language that needs to be amended based on your review or is that sufficient it says construct three inch high 30 by 30 inch wide concrete metal plate channel across gray to pass 1.8 cfs um i think the three inch high refers to the the sides not necessarily the height of the plate itself maybe that's a um uh um uh oversight um and then in install a concrete lip across upstream sided diversion and you know the the on page six of the submittal the photograph and and location of the lip is incorrect but the language is correct it is still upstream where the berm is yes yes and the plate will accomplish the goal of connectivity and habitat restoration yes okay um sorry where are we well well wait Wayne katsuyama did you have a question your hand is up oh thank you chair this is for I have two questions really one for mark and one for ken uh mark could you address the some of the safety issues that was raised by the sierra club uh in terms of uh notification of work uh i think aaron addressed the uh siphoningoning effect in the damming of the one diversion. But Mark, could you address the safety precautions that will be in place? So if notification to downstream residents, you know, I'm sure we can work out something, some sort of notification with a point of contact with the downstream residents of each particular stream. But the sudden release of an impoundment that would cause that, that, you know, we've gone over this before, and that's not something if if there's enough water in there impounded that we release it. That would put our employees in jeopardy that would put everyone in jeopardy. So that's just that we we just don't plan to work in those conditions. If the water is that high, we don't have to work in those conditions. I respect the Sierra Club mentioning that just saying that we we wouldn't want to put ourselves in jeopardy as well as anyone else so those are precautions we would take okay thank you mark um the second is really a clarification on the intent of the designs of the berms that was mentioned what is the structural integrity that's built into these designs that was engineered into these submittals um commissioner kateyama is the question for me either you or mark i mean you know you're planning on having these structures withstand a certain flow over a period of time. So as you went through the engineering specs for the berms and the grates, what was the design criteria that was used? So I do want to clarify something that, you know, when we talked with Akinaka and they were coming up with the criteria, one of the things was the actual channel size. And if the channel size is, you know, if the channel size is 30 inches by three inches high, that's the entire height of the berm. It's not something that we would put something, you know, largely intrusive in there, you know, as far as a berm is concerned. It's just to basically, the word I'm gonna use is to channelize the water into a certain location so that it can bypass the intake. Any flows that are consistently higher than that would have access to the breach themselves and the intake. But other than that, anything at a low flow, in a low flow situation is gonna be channeled into the bypass channel and run the extreme. And I think the berms are designed to be just the same height as the channel itself and that has withstood high fly high flow events over time thus far yes we've had situations like that we've used metal in the past and they have but i mean mother nature changes her mind you know daily and you know she decides today is the day and today is the day okay thanks mark aaron did you want to continue okay um the next location is uh same stream op, but a little bit further downstream at Center Ditch. The goal is to continue to retain all of that restored flow at the higher elevations downstream past the ditch. The the intake is quite a wide structure and the upstream part of it on this lip right here has some puccas in it. And so the first step would be let's fill in those puccas so that water doesn't drain into the ditch inadvertently as depicted in this photo the bottom right photo the next step would be to build a similar Channel across the concrete which is the the ditch itself and then over the intake structure which is this great and the um there would be a little lip it's very similar design as the previous location and then a bridge or a plate or something that that conveys that water downstream so that all of the base flows retained are retained in the stream so aaron just real quick um similar in the proposed action, if we were to be more clear to say install three inch berms to direct flow into channel, that would make it more explicit about not being these huge walls as the maybe the submittal originally depicted via image. Yeah, unfortunately, the scale of the design looks like they are quite substantial structures, but they are going to be non-intrusive visually, I don't think, relative to the scale of the design looks like they are quite substantial structures, but they are going to be non intrusive visually I don't think relative to the rest of the concrete that's already there. That's just to make it explicit about what the intent is correct. Okay. Yes. And then the last one I think we have one more on this modification. So cut a stream at center ditch. The intake is at center ditch. So the center ditch runs underneath the stream in this concrete area. And at the moment on the left bank, this wing wall has a whole bunch of puccas as designed to divert all the low flows into the ditch. And then higher flows are diverted along the right bank over this little berm into this area, which is the gravel trap, and then it spills into the ditch. The goal is to ensure that all of the low flows stay in the stream. So I believe the design is to notch out this upstream lip and then create a channel across the intake and seal up all of these low flow hookahs and then notch a section of the downstream wall lip, and then convey all of those low flows from upstream and the intake downstream without them being diverted. And as noted, the low flow channel is to be located at or near the lowest elevation intake so that all of the low flows remain in the channel and don't get diverted. Again, Ken, you are Aaron's descriptions are consistent with what you are proposing. I believe so. Roy worked on a lot of the details with the EMI folks. Roy, are you able to answer that question just to make sure that I'm not misspeaking? Yes, i'm having some. Can you hear me? I have me some zoom problems right now. But yeah, it's consistent. Okay, Okay, all right. Thank you. Thank you very much. Any other questions questions commissioners oh aurora i do so um aaron it sounds like it's just a flat metal plate that you're looking to put across and i guess is there is it going to be a little concave to ensure that the water actually gets past the grates i'm just i i don't want to micromanage i'm just trying to visualize what's happening. There are basically little walls. That's the three inch high reference. Okay. And we don't want it concave in the sense that it would force all the water to flow into a somewhat narrow channel. Our amphigermis species are really good at migrating small rivulets of water you know they they don't need a big flow so the the more spread out it is is is actually better for um recruitment yeah but we don't want to be spilling it over into so i guess i just need a better like the wing walls the wing walls keep it from spilling into the intake. Okay. Sorry, I don't know the terms. Maybe like little, if this are to be revised, like little diagrams that help people who need pictures would be really, really helpful. So this is a- Just like that. This thing. You see these little walls? Okay, that's the three-inch thing, too. Yeah. Got it. Sorry, I was thinking the wing walls were part of the ditch. Well, they do exist on the ditch, too. Okay. I just meant the walls on the plate. Mini wing walls. Okay. Mini, yeah. Yeah, if just the simplified diagram, so just so that it's in the record so that we are all talking about the same thing and understanding and have the same picture in our head, that would be really, really helpful. So these images will be amended or appended to the decision they're presented here and will be part of the minutes. So what we're discussing will be you know hopefully it's recommended amended will be all recorded here the intent so if it's not clear then let's make that clear um before any action is taken any other questions or comments commissioners neil i just want to go back to ken's concerns. So with regard to B1, your testimony regarding kind of resisting removing infrastructure doesn't apply. Am I correct, Ken? Because you're being allowed to leverage a lot of the existing infrastructure just to make kind of minimal adaptations to solve our purposes but but also have that infrastructure there for your needs as well or your class uh that is correct uh commissioner hannis okay thank you any other questions or comments commissioners I have one yes um I would like to hear from um Davidmel-Frankel, just thoughts. And after hearing this discussion, are there still the same concerns? I understand that there is a big thing is the notification and the quarterly meetings. But if you can kind of reflect back. So this has been really helpful and i think in terms of language um what i now understand is that the three inch berm is essentially three inches higher than the sheet the metal plate or concrete and because the way it's written in a and b submittal and as well as sea worm submittal is that the metal sheet and concrete would be three inches high which would sort of defeat the purpose of the lip or berm because it has to be lower so i think i think in some ways that uh aaron has clarified, but it would be good if that was more reflective in your decision. I appreciate Mark Vaught saying that they, I'm not sure if he's saying they never impound the water when they do these fixes. If that's the case, that provides a lot of assurance, but I'm not sure that's the case. I would think that sometimes when you do this work there'd have to be some kind of impoundment. But if if the commission if everyone's on the same page that there's gonna be no empowerment. Great. and then yeah, I think I think that takes care of everything. Mark, did you want to clarify that? Yeah, no, just confirming. Mr. Franco is correct. The general idea is not to impound a large amount of water and then have a sudden release because that jeopardizes not just downstream, but our employees as well. But do you anticipate that there may be times where you might have to impound the water that would affect downstream? Nope. No. We generally, what we try to do is create a bypass with some pipes and things so that the water can continue to flow downstream. That's excellent. Okay. All right. Great. Chair, we'll follow up with Mark. Mark, as I look at this picture on our screen and see those old old style greats are you familiar with the Kamehameha schools puna lu'u stream diversion no sir i'm not kind of some part ken i'm sure is there more modern systems to have kind of aluminum or aluminum systems that allow flow over as well as flow in and self cleaning. Neil, Neil? Our recording just fell. So we just want to make sure everything's on. Yeah. We'll wait till the recording goes back on. Okay. Thank you. You need a break? Yeah, maybe if you can- Okay. You know what, we're gonna take a 10 minute recess and then we'll go back to Neil's question. So we'll come back at 10 30. We need some tech help. you you you Thank you. you you you you you you Thank you. you you you you you you you you you you Thank you. you Thank you. you you you you you you you you you you you you Okay. We're back on the record. Is everybody here? We had oh, Neil, we'll continue on with your questioning. I also want to note that Kathy Ho with Department of Health just stepped in as well. But Joanna is going to complete item B1. All right, Neil. Yeah, thank you, Chair. I just want to encourage EMI and Okinaka to kind of look at some of the modern technologies available for those in-stream diversion. The old grates that were very inefficient and kind of greedy in terms of the water they took are been supplanted these days by more modern systems and as part of the commission's uh record on the emi decision we were encouraging modern investment to kind of make these systems more efficient and modern and safe thank you we're getting back can we um whoever has your youtube on can you turn it off it might be testifier whoever that may be no okay thank you neil any other questions by the commissioners do we have a motion so moved okay wayne has made a motion to approve staff's recommendation with some modifications. Go ahead, Aurora. Oh, and Neil has seconded. Discussion, Aurora. I just want to make sure the corrections are incorporated, and they were somewhat really detailed I mean they're factual sort of language issues in the submittal I don't know I don't think it makes sense to step through all of them so what options do we have I guess there there? I guess in taking notes while the discussion was going on, while Erin was presenting, the only thing that wasn't consistent was the three inch berms, the size and scale of the berm was what we wanted to provide clarity on. And so, you know, I would just recommend for diversions w15 and c7 where those berms are being proposed that we just amend the that proposed action to say install three-inch firms um or because can I make a comment? Now this wing. Oh, go ahead, Wayne. Yeah, I mean in in terms of intent of what we're trying to do. That's more of an engineering question and is I think you know every all the parties understand the purpose of that berm and it's not going to be something that is intrusive and so i think the language as submitted i think we flushed it out through our discussions with all parties that we're in agreement that it's there for a purpose and the purpose will be achieved and i don't think you know it matters if it's three and a half inches or two and a half inches but that berm would be put in place and serve the purpose of uh controlling the iifs yeah thank you maybe just to recommend to also the if the modifications do not meet the ifs obviously the commission has to it's we set ifs to be you know enforced and so if that isn't if the modifications as actually implemented do not sufficiently um meet the ifs based on our own monitoring then we'll come back to the commission and recommend further i agree that's a different issue. I agree with that. Can I recommend the revision, the inclusion of or clarification? Because when people are gonna read this document as a public record, they may misinterpret it as or interpret it as suggested. not the intent so um will the b2 presentation will be attached but making sure that it's connected more meaningfully to the submittal um would be helpful to reflect the discussion that we had for to reflect the clarifications that were made today um and the minutes will reflect that yeah i'm just thinking the public is not going to look at 3 different documents. They're gonna look at one. So help me out. Sorry i'm i'm i'm not very experienced in this like what would what would from Commissioner Katayama is I think he was perhaps one the proposed clarification by Kaleo the the the staff's recommendation will reflect the discussion and three the minutes will also if there's clarification, we can refer to the minutes. But I guess I too am a little concerned about making, how do I say, the more detailed we are, then the presumption is if we don't include it, then it was intentionally excluded. So I'm a little worried about putting too much detail where I think it appears clear ken was given an opportunity to confirm as was mark and roy when aaron was providing his um his clarification that i'm i guess i'm not sure i want to get into too much detail unless the commissioners feel otherwise because i think ken roy and mark you guys know what our intent know what the commissioners um intentions are um what the ifs and as i understand that this is this can be modified right khalil yeah this is these are modifications so they're you it's not, we're not abandoning these divergents. They would, there's still a relationship between the Commission and EMI as a diverter. And I'm also optimistic that there will be more quarterly meetings where the community will have an opportunity to be have, be included in some of these discussions before they get to the commission so some of this can be worked out at that level as well that as dean described the first meeting was more sort of meet greet introductions setting you know parameters and then as they get into more regular quarterly meetings there will be more specific discussions on proposed changes okay aurora do you want to make something more specific yeah can i um i am in um can i make a motion to approve but there are some factual text errors in this so with the staff correcting the um and clarifying those proposed actions it reflecting the discussions that had and also including in the recommendations that this will also be presented at the june 15th um quarterly meeting oh okay but that's up for discussion. I'm just, where are we? Okay. So motion has been made by Commissioner. Chair, that would be the second motion. So either we're going to revise the first motion and at the agreement of the person who made it and the second, and then we can move on or dispense with the first motion and now deal with the second so but you have a motion on the floor i had a motion from wayne from commissioner katayama yeah and i thought it was seconded to approve yeah to approve staff's recommendation but aurora are you proposing a new motion an amendment okay an amendment um um to um that the staff correct the submittal reflecting the discussion um on b1 the explanations given so commissioners hannis yeah and Katayama do you agree to the amendment Wayne you're on mute oh I'll second that amendment very good very. So a motion has been made and seconded with amendments. All in favor? Since this is our first motion. Oh, no. This is our second motion. So all in favor, say aye. Any opposition? I will note. Did Joanna, did I see your hand up too? The motion was approved unanimously. Very good. Shall we move on to item B2? Joanna, you want to pass your torch on to Kathy. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. Okay. Item B2, is that Dean? All right, Dean. Yes. Good morning, commissioners. Again, item B2, this is for approval of stream diversion works permit application, SDWP.5991.6, along with special conditions for East Maui Irrigation Company again and this is for abandonment of or to abandon registration of stream diversion numbers 234, 254, 238, 273, 260, 150, 262 and 173 and this remote involves removing pipes and sealing of intakes for Ho'olawa, Waipio, O'anui, West Opuola Tributary, Opuola Stream, Opuola Tributary and Makanali Streams in East Maui and Commission staff stands on its submittal and if I can I'm just going to jump to the recommendation and that is that the Commission one approved stream diversion works permit SDWP.5991.6 to event abandon diversions 234 and 254 on the whole lava stream diversion 23 on the Waipio Stream. Diversion 273 on the Oanui Stream. Diversion 260 on the West Opuola Tributary. Diversion 262 on Opuola Stream. Diversion 150 on the Opuola Tributary. And diversion 173 remove and remove pipes, seal intakes and restore stream flow subject to standard conditions in Exhibit 12 and the special conditions below. So special condition 1A, in conformance with the Division of Aquatic Resources recommendations incorporated by reference in Exhibit 9, it is the Division of Aquatic Resources policy for the abandonment of stream diversions is the removal of the diversion structure and the associated infrastructures, restoring the stream, as well as constructing curbs above the upstream end to concentrate the stream flowing into the overpass channel and from spilling into the ditch. For diversion OH-1, also referred to as NH-21 or 254, on Hoʻolawa stream, the diversion wall shall be removed completely or if unable to remove completely, the permittee shall create a low flow stream channel to improve connectivity at low stream flows. In alignment with DARS recommendations for diversion W7 or 173 on Makanali stream, the diversion wall shall be removed completely. Abandonment of diversion is subject to SHPD concurrence. If SHPD requires conditions, delegate to deputy director to attach those conditions, those as conditions of abandonment. Excuse me. In conformance with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service recommendations incorporated by reference in Exhibit 11, the permittee shall 1. Implement plant avoidance and minimization measures identified, if any work would occur in the nearby terrestrial areas, and 2. Employ applicable best management practices for any in-water work. And second, declare that the project is exempt from EA requirements under HRS Chapter 343 and HAR Chapter 11-200.1. And that concludes staff's presentation. Commissioners, any questions for staff um and similarly uh as prior uh we can walk through the i believe aaron dr aaron stroke has um uh images that we can walk through that might be helpful to do that first and then we'll take ken go ahead aaron I apologize for not having the staff submittal or the order queued up with the staff submittal, but I will walk through each of the diversions that I put photographs together for. The NH-19 or Diversion 234 is the Hohelawanui intake on New Hamakua Ditch. The ditch runs under the stream right here, and there's a dam across the stream channel that pools up water, and then it would spill into this. There is a trash rack right here, although it's covered in debris, and then it would flow into the new hamakua ditch the abandonment proposes to seal this intake so that no water can be diverted and then i don't know if anything can be done to this wall because it's built into the ditch, but to the extent practicable, they I believe they will remove a part of it. So that no water pools up. But as you can see, under under existing low flow conditions there is there's no flow however proposed uh additional modifications to whole avenue at yloa ditch which is upstream of here will increase the base flow to the stream and therefore there is expected to be some flow here. So the idea is to prevent the diversion of any flow, low or high at this location and allow it to continue downstream. This is an abandonment of the stream diversion work. So no water will ever be diverted at this location again um are there any questions yeah any i guess what i'd like to do is um aaron you do do your overview for each of these um any questions from the commissioners and then i'd like to make sure that ken either ken or roy confirmed that that aaron's description is consistent with your understanding as well okay all right so any questions from the commissioners on aaron's um overview yes neil so we know that the issue is going to arise as to how much you have the applicant remove so in this case they're not removing everything no because the the the you can see the concrete structure that the ditch flows in right here so this is the ditch is flowing right here okay so i you know we'll break that, we'll break that wall and create a gap and capture flow, but the applicant will be allowed to leave in place all that other infrastructure. Yeah, like this wing wall here keeps debris out of the ditch. You know, there's parts of the concrete are specifically protecting the ditch. I believe some of this wall can be removed. I don't know to the extent how much. So, Aaron, the current recommendation is just to remove grate and seal the hole in a ditch, and there's been no recommendations to modify that wall at this time. Okay. That's not what i heard correct so that's why i'm just making the crosswalks so part of what um and this is also uh internal coordination so we have a permit branch okay and dean is in charge of both the permit side as well as insurance side so we're crosswalking the sewer recommendation, which is primarily focused on the IFS and then the permitting or abandonment of the diversions that's handled by another branch in surface water. So what's being proposed or recommended in the application is just to remove the grate and seal the hole so the intake no longer functions but there's been no recommended modifications of that that wall that's basically holding up the ditch although aaron said he thinks it could be done that's not what's in the proposal i'm just making that very clear that's that's important because that's not correct okay all right i will i will continue with that there. There might be modifications wall that are permissible without damaging the structural integrity of it like notching. I don't know some width in the middle or putting pukas through it. You know I i'm not the engineer. I don't know how it was built, but I just I know that the primary purpose is to remove this diversion from its function by sealing it. And I believe that they will just concrete over the intake so that there's there's no possibility that any water could be diverted. Okay, let's hear from Ken. Sra22 Panellist, Ken Roy to confirm what are you proposing in your application. Ken Roy- Thank you Chair Chang. Ken Roy- Roy actually has the applications up, which I think is not visible by the commissioners. But Roy can look at the applications on what was submitted and corroborate or clarify any differences. Yeah. Thank you, Ken. Generally, what Deputy Manuel clarified is correct. There was nothing about the removal of the wall that Aaron is talking about. It's just sealing the intake to allow all the flows to bypass. So that's true. Wall removal was not part of the proposal in the application. I would maybe recommend that the submittal request that you might evaluate how much of the wall can be removed without damaging the integrity of the ditch. Aaron Miller Sr.: and proceed with that Aaron, maybe to help facilitate the conversation. Sorry. No commission. There's with the reestablishment of the ifs or mock provisions upstream of this diversion. What is the flow that's anticipated below that upper diversion to reach this one? Or is this a losing part of the stream or is it a gaining part of this it's a gaining stream um there is a large uh lava tube at the base of a waterfall that um you know at just below the wailoa ditch on ho'olabanui but the overall it's gaining downstream and below this intake it's gaining so that the goal is to get all of these low flows downstream to the in stream values such't want the water pooling up behind the dam, you know, if pucas can be put into it, if a notch can be cut out of it to convey the water downstream more effectively, that would help, I think. Kaleo, I'm wondering, and I'm talking out loud, Aaron, do you have more recommendations than what is being proposed in the application? Because is it better for staff to go back and work with the applicant and then resubmit this when there's some internal discussion because I'm I am also concerned about Ken's 343 question so I I'm wondering if it might be more productive for there to be internal discussion with the applicant rather than proceeding? I think we can work through it today. I don't think many of the recommendations are substantial. I just know that I'm busy on the in-stream use section side of things, as you will find out later, and finding time to meet to discuss regulatory issues are challenging. Okay challenging okay hello you have a recommendation yeah I'm open to either chair I mean we could go through it and see if it's a majority of again the goal is to the commission give a timeline to modify and abandon in order to meet the ifs because that's our goal but we want We want to protect the industry values. And so there was a similar recommendation in November, an application that came in and then proposed modifications. If we could potentially defer, have this conversation in the June quarterly meeting, especially as it relates to abandonments and then come back in July or August, if you feel more comfortable. And then we can spend, I think we should just do that if you don't mind and then Aaron. We can do we do the presentations on the stream work that you're doing today um. And if that's okay with the applicant give us more time to work with Community applicant through the abandonment one the modification submittal prior was pretty um direct and straightforward yeah that that would be my because i i am based on one hearing ken's opening remarks um and just my own concern because part of your submittal is a 343 exemption and if indeed we are going to be doing work that may trigger 343 i would rather have that internally discussed before it comes back to the commission can we walk through the submittal however i i don't believe that um we're that far off with what ken was had an issue with and many of these modifications are going to be full stream diversion abandonments which we the applicant knows. I mean that wasn't up for discussion. Yeah, let's let's table for now, because i'd rather make I want to make sure that we are in alignment before we continue the conversation. So we can just defer for now. I appreciate that. Thanks, Aaron. Okay, we don't need a motion on that. Oh, no, just we'll defer. All right. We still have the right to testify. Yes. So commissioners, do you have any questions about the deferral and what's being proposed? Okay. All right. With that we'll take public comments and David Kimo Frankel go ahead. Thank you on behalf of the Sierra Club again. I do think Mr. Kawahara has misled you a bit. So I want to be very clear about this. It may be an interim in stream flow standard. But when you talk about abandonment, that is permanent. Okay. Abandonment is not a temporary measure it is permanent let me read from you read to you a little section of from black's law dictionary abandon is to give up or to cease to use to give up absolutely to forsake entirely to renounce utterly um So when they are going to abandon the structure but leave it in place, what they are telling you is that structure will be there forever. And there are some legal challenges you will face down the road if they abandon the structure, leave it in a stream, and in two years, 10 years, 20 years, you decide you want it removed. Because they are coming to you to abandon the structure, what they're telling you is they want to abandon the structure in place forever. That's why the Division of Aquatic Resources recommendations that your staff has agreed to are so important. Now the Sierra Club is a balanced approach. From those areas where an entire structure can and should be removed, it should be removed. It should not be abandoned in place what emi wants to do is wash its financial hands from these structures which should not be in a stream i also want to point out to you that the amount of water that is proposed to be left in these streams is a very small amount. These streams, the diversions that we're talking about, none of them are full restoration, and I don't believe any of them actually are 64% of base flow. There are very little amounts of water. So when Mr. Kawahara says, well, in the future, we might want more water from these streams. And so we might need these structures. What his real suggestion is, all the water will need to be removed from these streams in the future. And that is a bridge which we should not cross. We are done with the days of completely dewatering streams. And that is why the permanent removal of these structures that are proposed to be abandoned is so important. Because if they want to come back and say, oh, we need more water from these streams, then let them go through the process of doing a 343 document let them apply let's go through the process of justifying whether all the water should be taken from these streams which is what they did historically more than 100 years ago and should never have occurred this is a it's a new day that should not be happening so we should be supporting the permanent removal of the abandoned structures uh and we look forward to more productive conversations along these lines and for a if if if you're going to ask this to re-come come up on your agenda perhaps some more and better photos that prevent present a more complete picture for some of these diversions, particularly a number of the abandoned PVC and other pipes that are not depicted in some of the photographs, thank you. Thank you very much. Commissioners. Any questions on this item? Okay. The item has been. Do we have any? Yeah. Okay. There is no other testimony. So the item has been deferred. Oh, Neil, is your hand up? No, I was just scratching it. Okay, fair enough, fair enough. All right, with that being said, we're going to defer this item and then staff you will resubmit to us when it's complete. Very good. Okay, let's move on to item C, C1. This is Dr. Stroud will be doing the presentation for you folks today on item C1. Thank you very much, Aaron. Thank you, Chair. Aaron Stroud with the Stream Protection and Management Branch. Item C1 is for information only, and it's a summary of current statewide fieldwork activities in the string protection and management branch. And I kind of want to be with the caveat that this is the in-stream use protection section. Fieldwork does not include the regulatory section fieldwork with that. With that this is also not field work associated with Usgs. Gaging stations. We fund a cooperative agreement approved by the Commission, and renewed annually in August, and it hosting for all of the real time and some non real time monitoring stations across the state as depicted in this figure. Can you share screen? You're not sharing yet. Sorry. Too fast. All right, let me go back. Yeah, go back. Thank you. There opening screen. I also want to say, if you want to interrupt me, please do so. I will try and be as thorough as possible, but I will always miss something. This is a photograph of the lower Hamakua ditch as it discharges water out of Waipio Valley, which we monitor for the Department of Agriculture. Okay. The Usgs Cooperative Agreement, as previously discussed, funds all of these real-time stations across the state. Stations are kept or added to this agreement to monitor natural flow where long-term records exist in order to track climate change impacts on watersheds. We fund or add natural flow stations and streams with in-stream and non-in-stream uses that have been where commission action has been taken in order to better understand the availability of water for these uses and then we fund a small select number of usgs stations that monitor regulated flow these are particularly in large streams where IIfs monitoring is needed and it large streams present a logistical challenge for Commission staff to monitor simply because they require much more modeling and surveying to maintain because of the the nature of large watersheds and the material that moves through them so the stream protection and management branch is one of four branches within the water commission and then it is there are two sections the surface water regulation section and the in-stream use protection section and we have a staff of four right now that are in the in-stream use protection section. And we are responsible for all of the fieldwork that I will discuss. Most of the fieldwork is focused on quantifying select in-stream values. So these are the, as defined by the water code, the nine in-stream values, and then a depiction of the hydrology as it affects these in-stream values, and then non-in-stream uses of water. And we focus primarily on quantifying the hydrology, which is a big component of any management decision, fish and wildlife habitat, Hawaiian rights, and then the non-in-stream uses we have references to the availability of recreation and ecosystem maintenance and aesthetic values and navigational potential and hydropower and water quality from other reports or other divisions within DLNR or outside of DLNR like like the Department of Health, and we reference those for their data. So in the in-stream use protection section, we have four areas of fieldwork focus. One is hydrologic data collection, and that includes continuous and non-continuous monitoring of stream and ditch flows and seepage runs which quantify surface water and groundwater interactions we then can we also conduct biological surveys or biological data collection to provide population estimates of aquatic biota quantification of habitat and use and specifically fieldwork following Commission action if the goal of the Commission action was to improve habitat quality and recruitment of native amphidermis biota we also conduct in the course of our fieldwork stream diversion verifications to follow up on the registration process that happened in 1989 and then in the 90s staff conducted field verification of of every registrant. And then I believe hired a consultant to focus on windward Oahu and um and then we conduct investigations or site visits or responses to complaints regarding in-stream flow standards we meet with diversion operators following commission action and gather with community in the field so this is the four main areas of focus so what are non-continuous monitoring stations non-continuous monitoring stations are locations where we maintain a record of stream flow measurements but we don't have the equipment installed that maintains a continuous record or measures stage continuously over time or at 15 minute intervals or hourly intervals we do these to focus on improving outreach to communities so this is the Waikapu above Waie why hey ditch so in the white Kapu community in. Mike Wilberg , City of Boulder, Now a Han Maui was concerned with the amount of water that was flowing just above the way hey ditch and so we installed a staff plate and developed a rating curve and make periodic measurements to verify it. to help the community better understand how much water is flowing at that elevation. It's not related to an in-stream flow standard, stream to verify the in-stream flow standards being met. This is a reference point in East Covella, and as you are familiar with, we have been working in East Covella for some time in the last couple years, and we make all of our measurements in reference to a specific location, a fixed point, so that we can relate all of the measurements to a datum, which then helps us develop and maintain rating curves. We have quite a few continuous monitoring sites across the state. A lot of these involve a data logger that's in the stream that makes flow measurements of 15 minute or hourly intervals depending on the location most of these are in reference to an in-stream flow standard this is in lualohe on Molokai this site is Waikoko on um uh Kauai this is why a who below the the confluence of the north and south way who streams and then this is a the upper Hamakua ditch above Waimea Reservoir Station. Some of these locations were former USGS stations that we've rehabilitated, and some of them are just recently installed over the last decade by CWIM staff. We have a small number of real-time monitoring stations, and these involve much more equipment to install. Some of them require a decent amount of cabling to get the equipment outside of the high flow channel because these locations tend to be fairly remote, and if we're going to bring the equipment in to that remote location, we don't want it wiped out by a high flow event. So they tend to be secured to galvanized piping or to a tree, for example, and they require solar panels and that sort of thing. This is ADDIT 6 monitoring the Honokohau ditch. This is Waie'e stream below Spreckels ditch. And this is Kaua'e stream below Keikohau ditch. Aaron, real quick, can you maybe just talk about the three benefits or maybe the continuum of the three, the benefits or maybe the continuum of the three different gauging that you do just so it's public and the commissioners, what the intent of each of those are and the limits of the data that's collected at each? Yes, so all continuous data has to be QAQC and quality control, quality assurance, which involves looking at the period of record that is of interest, and comparing it to reference sites like other Usgs gauges in the area measurements or site visits that staff make and conduct in the field. And so when we conduct, when we maintain continuous monitoring stations, we have a lot of office work that goes into processing the data before it's acceptable. And a lot of that takes time that we have a staff of four and, you know, maintaining these databases requires a substantial amount of office time. And continuous record stations are more beneficial to understand what's happening in between site visits because they provide that record, but they require a lot of processing whereas non-continuous monitoring sites or stations we go we make the flow measurement we report the data and if it say that the value doesn't meet the iifs we we let the operator the diversion know um in in many cases in some cases uh we we just tell the the point of contact in the community, for example, what we measured, and and that is that real time. Monitoring stations are great in that it provides for some assurance in real time what the flow is, but as I frequently mentioned, there are also real-time errors involved, which is difficult to communicate, especially in the wet season when we have large flow events that might aggrade or degrade the channel. We work with USGS staff to understand the magnitude of a lot of these flow events and what has happened at their stations as index stations. Some stations are more resilient to changes in flow conditions like ditches, for example. But even ditches can have stage shifts when boulders are falling into the open ditch, for example. The like Kauai station right here, there was a large flow event at the end of January. And while this station I we haven't even been able to get access to the station, because all the low flow crossings requires 19 string crossings to get to all of them have been wiped out, and this station apparently the water got got 10, 12 feet above this level. And this sensor got ripped out, despite all of my best efforts to secure it to the bedrock. So when there's more equipment in the stream, there are more problems that could happen. I actually really like the non-real-time continuous monitoring stations because they're straightforward, simple, they have small footprints, and they're easier to maintain long-term. Real-time stations have batteries that need to be replaced and insects that can chew up wires or get into the electronics. So it can be challenging to maintain them. So that's the pros and cons of each of the sites. Yeah, and I just wanted to ask, just so you understand the continuum of options that we have for Gagee, and then there's varying costs related to that, and that transitions well in DynMC too. So while we want data and need data for decision making, there is just real, the practicality of getting that data is oftentimes challenging for us to work with with our limited resources. So we have to measure flow in order to verify that the sensor is reading accurately while we also conduct site visits to measure stage and in reference to nearby reference points or datums. And flow measurements can take anywhere from 45 minutes to an hour and a half, depending on the size of the stream and the channel conditions that have to be maintained in order to make an accurate or a flow measurement with low uncertainty and our staff of usually two will go out into the field approximately quarterly to make these flow measurements the standard protocol for USGS is about six times per month per year so uh every other month we just don't have the staff or the the funding to maintain that level of um uh uh field work and but you know we do our best with our our limited resources and some of these sites can take an hour and a half to get to this is the North Fork Waialua River below the Blue Hole intake and uh I mean it's at least 45 minutes to an hour drive, plus a half hour hike in just to get to this one site. So you can imagine some some days we measure five or six locations, some days we measure three. So it just depends on the location. Aaron, can I ask you, are other providers or entities also measuring and do you all share information so we fund usgs um we are the largest cooperator of the usgs uh network hydrological data collection network but we're not the only funder so a lot of our stations are cost shared with other entities. And then outside of the USGS, I know of a few small, like there's one or two University of Hawaii or federal organizations that measure flow or maintain any monitoring sites. Then there is the Department of Health, when they do some field work, they also measure at their location. But in many circumstances, the county just pays for the USGS to maintain a station or monitor for a particulate or make flow measurements, that sort of thing. There are a few nonprofits that make flow measurements, but I'm not aware of where they store that data. And Chair, just real quick, we do come every August to renew and get approval from the Commission to renew that cooperative agreement. And so we've asked us just to do a similar presentation for this body to kind of go over their monitoring program and the details of their field work that we're ultimately paying for right in order to provide that data to us. So that's coming in August. Aurora? Just a quick yes, no, is DOT, does DOT do any kind of? They cost share. Most of their funding goes to crest stage gauges. So across the state, they fund hundreds of crest stage gauges. And then where it is, where there's synergy with the water commission's efforts or or usgs's needs um there are we cost share stations so in say like in waikapu we added a natural flow usgs gauging station to the cooperative agreement in the last couple of years and it's being cost shared with uh department of transportation so they fund the peak flow estimates which involves a lot of modeling a lot of field work for measuring stream contours and that sort of thing and we look for uh you know in order to expand the network with our limited funds, we look for opportunities to cost share where possible. I one more does Noah and no a also participate in that and I asked because right now there's a big national push with Cairo, and they're very flooding focused, so they want to have advanced warning and it just seems like everybody should hang out together and from what i understand noah only funds rainfall stations um their own they have their own network of rainfall stations and then from what i've seen on their website all of their you know flood warning stations are all usgs that we fund. Okay. Thank you. All right. Sorry. Go ahead. All of our field work is focused on- Aaron, can I ask a question? Yes, go ahead. All right. Thanks. You do a lot of work on quantity. Who does the work on quality? That falls under the department of health is there a way that you can cooperate in sort of cost sharing some of that or are these uh reaches way beyond what they would need well we i we don't there are we don't have the regulatory authority over quality so we don't fund quality monitoring. And I would you providing the data I mean you're there in the stream looking at flows twice. Oh, you suggesting that staff support department of health with water collect with the collection of samples for analyses for water quality is that what you're suggesting well can they help you uh provide money to do i mean they must be spending money on doing that they have i mean i'm not going to speak for doh but i do know that they have limited funds still that's yeah uh they there was an article about beach water quality monitoring for example example, on Maui. They don't have the ability to monitor remote streams in the middle of the forest. Well, I mean, the question will come up is if you look at sustainability long term, is that there is a quantity and quality issue and if we're going to start using surface water for portable needs when do we start understanding that what's uh contributing to the quality of that water and i guess at the end of your presentation, I guess in your what is a balance that you need in terms of gauging stations or measurement capacity to get to a point where we understand where we can strike a balance in providing you know, sustainable water sources for all the needs so the commission supported the USGS uh study looking at our water resource monitoring needs and there was a publication two years ago or maybe now it's three years ago on where we need groundwater monitoring, where do we need streamflow monitoring, where do we need rainfall monitoring, and especially going into this period of climate uncertainty. And you know, we kind of, we know where we need to monitor, we just don't have the funding to do it. Well, is there sort of a dream sheet where you kind of pencil out the funding requirements given the pressure or the interest on climate change definitely and I think we I presented to that to the commission either last year the year before that if we had given the constraints of USGS's to add stream gauges, for example. We could probably realistically add the read of 5 Usgs gauging stations each year to the cooperative agreement for the next 10 years, and then we would be at surface water, you know a a much better place monitoring surface water resources across the State, and that's not to take anything away from what we do as staff. We would still continue to do what we do but we're at capacity. We we i'm hoping that we get to hire more staff in the in the near term, and I believe we do have funding to do that, but we are staff time and budget limited. So if I can share. Well, we'll save this for when Kalea does his presentation next. Yeah, yeah, that's exactly what I was gonna say. Jumping the gun for item C too, but then maybe to touch on the Department of Health conversation, both myself and Kathy, the deputy with DOH have talked about how do we better coordinate and manage our resources and share data so that we both can effectively do our kuleana as it relates to us as well as Department of Health's Clean Water Act and Safe Drinking drinking water act responsibilities so i think the goal is in this you know this administration that will work to kind of tighten up that relationship understand that data sharing more clearly and then how we can work better together across agency on water quality and quantity good we can have that in c2 thank you all right good enough all right aaron you want to continue on yes thank you thank you. We also assist other water users or operators of systems across the state. For example, this is the farmer's ditch in Hanapepe that distributes water to riparian farmers in Hanapepe Valley. This is the portion of the Hanama Ulu ditch that feeds the agribusiness development agency or corporation, sorry, ADC. And then this is the Department of Agriculture's Waimea Irrigation or Upper Hamakua Ditch. A lot of these agencies just don't have the staff or expertise to maintain a monitoring station or or make flow measurements our equipment is very specialized um each one of these devices is third well was five years ago or six years ago thirteen thousand dollars um and you know with inflation i would probably venture it's fifteen to twenty thousand dollars now um and then you know a lot of these non-profits say this is the East Waioli ditch that feeds the East Waioli taro Hui and um they just um you know they're a small operation that um is not they just don't have the ability to um maintain this equipment or or a monitoring site so what we do is we partner with them. They read the staff plate as frequently as possible, and then we maintain the rating curve for them. Same with like the Hanumauluditch here, or the Kealia ditch here. um all right so our current hydrological data program we have continuous data collection on 12 at 12 sites on kauai three on oahu uh four on molokai 12 on in west maui and 16 in wow oh we lost you aaron your song went out. Do you hear me? No, we can. Now we can. Okay. So we have continuous data collection across the islands. There are 12 sites on Kauai, three on Oahu, four on Molokai, 12 in West Maui, 16 in East Maui, and three on Hawaii. Occasionally, so in West Maui, for example, we maintained a couple of sites that were monitoring natural flow following the 2014 USGS low flow study. And we wanted to verify that the continuous record data reflected what was estimated as water available. Some of these stations were then upgraded to Usgs stations by the Commission. So in 2,018, I believe the Kaua Stream Engage and our stream gauging station, and the Kahoma Stream Station were upgraded, and then in 2, 2020 the Ukumehame natural flow monitoring station was added. The non-continuous monitoring that we do, quite a few on Kauai, none on Oahu or Molokai, four in West Maui and 16 in East Maui. And these are related to like partial record gauging stations that we've been maintaining uh to develop low flow characteristics so um the the recommendation by USGS is that every three to five years um do a couple more uh flow measurements under low flow conditions to verify that the um the the hydrological patterns that are predicted by the previous model and previous measurements still hold true. And then we measure on Hawaii Island at five locations. One of these is related to the Wailuku hydropower. Two are related to the INACO commission decision with the IIFS. And then two are related to monitoring the Wai'a'ama stream. Again, it includes natural and regulated stream flow, IIFS monitoring, ditch flow monitoring. So what does that mean for our field work schedule? So we have to conduct, it takes about five days of field work quarterly to maintain what we do in Kauai, two days on Oahu, two days on Molokai, four days in West Maui, four days in East Maui, and one day on Hawaii Island. That means we are in the field about 72 days a year. If you have one more day of office work, which it usually takes more than one day. But say we had one more day of office work to process that data about over 50% of our time is just dedicated to hydrological data collection and it does not include days that we have to repair or maintain equipment for example after the the January flooding in Waimea Canyon we have I have at least two days worth of maintenance to do that are you know the backlog continues we this does not include additional measurements that are part of the hydrologic studies that we do, and does not include biological surveys or other field investigations. So where do we monitor? We monitor in Waioli on the North Shore. uh Kaloa region Lawhai um Hanapepe and throughout Waimea Canyon on Kauai on Oahu we have a station in uh Waianae Valley and Makiki and then in um Manawili or the the Waimanalo ditch on Kauai we monitor natural flow conditions in the Waikou Valley, and then in Lualohe, Kanakakai, Oluwalu, Ukumihame, and Waikakupu streams we have monitoring stations right now. We have in the past monitored at other locations like in Kauula or in Wailuku River, but those stations have been discontinued because they were upgraded to USGS stations. So it's not that the data aren't being collected, it's just that we are not the agency collecting the data. Go ahead. Quick question. So I was just thinking about the workload and what, you guys are crucial for all of it, but what can you potentially outsource? If, have you guys thought about that? Because your skills are valuable as a hydrologist. Are there other activities that could potentially be outsourced? He's shaking his head. Not really. You just need more of your staff. Or more money to hire USGS. The data processing, some of it's automated, but it still requires a real human. Is there something that takes most of your time? Just curious. Yeah, QA, QC. just curious yeah qaqc uh-huh okay i mean in terms of the the amount of time that i'm not in the field i would say i mean obviously going in the field is a whole day so usually we're on you know the 5 45 or 6 15 a.m flight um and then we're back at seven or eight o'clock at night and so that's that's a standard field day and we had a team yesterday go to kawaii and they were on the 5 50 a.m flight and back home at eight or they were on the 8 p.m flight back landing at 8 40 so um you know and then you have all the data that were gathered you have to process and so it's you know we for for every day i'm in the field there's at least one day that you need to be in the office just to process the data and i would say at least because it's usually more than that and then i'm not available to do anything else during that period of time and we are not it's not just me it's a collective effort we have a a really solid team yeah so that's i i will highlight that that is why when we have him available he is pushing to be present and be fully present in this conversation for for really the analysis part um the review of the data and and proposed management recommendations one thing to collect the data but then how is that data used for management recommendations is another part of that. And he is, Aaron is, and his team is good at what they do. But it's shifting into item C2. This is also, we had time, so we wanted to make sure we updated this body again and the public about what it takes to get the data. So that way we can get it. It's easy once it's in a paper, but all of that work that gets to this point is it does take time and money and resources to do that. That's helpful. Now, Aaron, or maybe Kaleo, when we have lawsuits, do we make that part of mitigation a requirement that they have to pay for monitoring and staff to monitor for lawsuits i mean this is an ag question maybe but for potentially but what we've been trying to do where there's off-stream benefit where like somebody's diverting water we've made sure that they're one reporting their diverted amount of water that they're using right so they either have to comply and meet the reporting requirements, or we just recommend if you partner with us and USGS, pay for the gauge, then it's an install that, it's kind of an upfront cost, but in the longterm you get this data that ensures that you're in compliance with the IFS that's set. And so there has been more focused effort, I would say in the past four five years to push to have this cool sharing this partnership um in a regulatory compliance kind of perspective but also just like we all benefit from good data um so there's been that shift to try to see where where we can partner and it's not a hundred percent water commission funding for this resource um we try to get those private partners on board we've also um and hopefully i'll touch on this a little bit too it's really been focusing on where we can leverage other federal funding and our programs to support the data collection needs of of our of our staff and agency because when you get others collecting data, is there a quality assurance issue? That is a big issue and one of the challenges on both sides. So similar, whenever we've had enforcement actions brought before the commission, we try our best to use. We have our data. We provide the opportunity for those that we're bringing the complaint against to provide alternative data oftentimes they don't have that. And so they've also seen the benefit of investing in their own data collection to have an alternative to our data sets. We also like usgs they collect data with no management recommendations, and so we rely on them oftentimes for some of that core data in our management decisions and even enforcement compliance recommendations. And maybe whether we can make this administratively or we have to get legislation, but we really perhaps should be looking at passing on some of those costs through our permitting process that there's a fee associated with the permits that go into a fund to pay for data so that is coming forward and potentially our administrative rules and recommendations which are regulatory fees that we have authority to accommodate um so that way portions of those fees like if you're benefiting from the use of diverting water you're also contributing into caution the understanding what the low flow is right what it takes to monitor and key so that's one way to kind of offset the staff costs potentially in the future. Okay sorry. Sorry, it's okay. I I also want to add that in a situation where there's a lawsuit or a settlement is is achieved. Say, with Kamehameha schools in the lalakea issue that occurred. It's a fixed amount and Usgs gauges while there is an upfront cost. There's also an operation of maintenance costs that we pay for every year, and that's where you know we we see the benefit of a particular gauge that was funded temporarily by say the Department of planning and public works, or or whatever it is that at the county level, or you know it gets funded through a cooperative agreement with Kamehameha Schools and then six years down the road it the the money dries up and then we don't we don't have that data coming in so we add it to our cooperative agreement so in I apologize for adding to the cost of our cooperative agreement but I see the benefit of increased data collection so yeah we just keep adding stations. Okay, very good. In East Maui, quite a few sites were established for the Water Commission as low flow. Iifs monitoring sites back in 2,009 2,010 as part of the first East Maui IIFS decision. And we continue to monitor quite a few of those, although in certain locations the stream has been fully restored. And in order to save on staff time, we've pulled our equipment and stopped visiting that site. Because say on Honopo, we already have a USGS gauge up above the Wailoaoa ditch so we don't need to monitor down below the haiku ditch um and then that gives us uh frees up a little bit of time and and money to maintain new uh iifs's so since that usgs uh push to install monitoring uh in east Maui in again 2009-2010. We've added stations on Nui'ailua, on Kopiliula, on... We've had to move a station on Waiahu'i and then we've added, since the decision in the last couple years addressing the streamflow standards in East Maui has come out. We've added Haipua'ene, Puahokumoa, and Nui'i, and Huala'i, and all of these stations require a lot of fieldwork to maintain. I mean, a day in East Maui is never a dull day. There are trees down, there are flash floods. We're up in the forest, so it's not always easy. We also maintain a former USGS station on Haipua Enestream above the Waikamoi Flume. This was part of the question when the 2018 DNO was released, was how much water is available at the county level in the Olinda or Upper Kula water system. And there is a USGS gauge on Waikamoi at this elevation, but the Haipua NS station was discontinued in the 70s. And we really wanted to monitor these high elevation stream flows that are so critical for both drinking water and agriculture in the Kula region. So we've added that station in the last year, year and a half. But mostly we focus down in the lower elevations. But again, that's all relative. Some of them require an ATV or off-road vehicle and and a lot of slogging through wet vegetation to get to um on the big island we do just a few locations the lower hamakua ditch and upper hamakua ditch we monitor in partnership with the department of agriculture they just don't have the staff or resources to do the monitoring themselves. And then Waikoloa stream in Waimea town we monitor. The Waikoloa watershed is critical for drinking water supply for Waimea, but it also supports an abundance of in-stream values that are not being met. So moving forward, we would like to, we are using this data set as well as USGS data from the upper watersheds to develop an interim stream flow standard. We also monitor in Inico a commission decision in 2,012. I think I I can't remember the contested case date, but that restored certain flow to a branch stream there, and then we monitor in wayama stream right um the the natural flow and then what's diverted to calculate the instrument because the channel is just not um easy to monitor so all of the the data that we gather are available in three basic locations one um you know we put whatever we gather into an in-stream flow standard assessment report, which is kind of a static publication point in time that is used for making recommendations, management decision recommendations. But we then, we've also released a standalone publications, like this is the low flow characteristics that we developed in East Maui and specifically in the Huelo region, but actually incorporates fieldwork from all of East Maui last year. And then all of our data are also available online. And we have a web portal that provides for the non-continuous data. So you click on a circle and the data from the last download can can be accessed, and then continuous data from Usgs stations or or the seam room stations are available. We're bringing in not every Usgs station but all the ones that are relevant for management decisions or or in stream flow standards um uh so that's where the that data are available we also conduct seepage runs which quantify that surface water groundwater interaction so this is one we did in 2021 in on colea stream um so as we previously discussed the constraints on hydrological data collection, we only have a staff of 4. We can send out 2 person teams to get to 3 to 7 sites in one day. Often these involve long traveling days to neighbor islands. Each field day requires 1 to 2 office days, and we're basically limited by the number of days staff can travel. If you've ever traveled in our island back-to-back days while doing 12 to 15 hours in the field, back-to-back days can get really fast. And I want to specifically thank my technician, Doug Kagawa, who endured back-to-back travel days throughout the pandemic with me. We really worked hard. We are also limited by our budget for travel and equipment. It just limits what we can do. Our biota surveys that we conduct, we are looking at specific questions like what is the current size and distribution of aquatic populations? This is especially related to post-restoration relative to pre-restoration conditions. What factors affect population dynamics such as antecedent hydrology, predation or competition with non-native species, habitat quality, or recruitment to estuaries or estuary management. We have quite a few estuaries, especially on Oahu but elsewhere, that are clogged with non-native species like mangrove or how bush or bamboo that might affect recruitment. I want to thank the team of DAR and UH staff and sea worms that have endured all of these biota surveys with us. Skippy Howe in particular was instrumental in this data collection effort, as well as Jody Kimmel. This is our our most of our in-stream use protection section. In-stream use section in the stream protection management branch, Cody, Malie, and Doug. And these are our sites in West Maui, Honokohau, Ukumehame, Oluwalu, that might be cola. Our biota surveys in West Maui have focused both on low elevation and high elevation reaches, and that is to quantify recruitment and Honokohau sites in 2019 for potential decision making which was then I believe in stream flow standards were established in May of 2020 in those streams and then we are hoping to be able to conduct follow-up surveys in 2020 then this summer from 2020 to 2022 we focused a lot on east Maui, and this is related to the Huelo decision recommendations, but also follow up to the stream surveys that DAR conducted in 2008 to 2011 in Honomanu and Nahiku streams to look at what the impact of restored flow has had on the population of amphibious species. So these are all these black dots are where we conducted stream surveys. Most recently we've been working on Oahu to look at the impacts of restored flow in the Waihole Ditch region but also have added a couple of other streams nearby with similar characteristics that have had management decisions on them, such as Heia stream and Pumalutu stream. And we would like to add Waihea stream if we have time, but we've conducted biota surveys on Waihole, Waikane, kahana, and punalutin so far. And we're looking at, I'm just going to throw up some really nice photos that I happen to have. Ala Mo'o, Nopili, Nakhea, Nopili, here you can, Nopili maintain Here you can no Pili maintain you know they they kind of grow they like to clean off or graze algae that then grows biofilm that they like to eat. Hihiwai. And then finally our diversion verification. So especially tied to Commission action. This is who a low wahine I believe that was abandoned by the commission in 2,018. And so we did a follow-up verification that the the intake is is completely sealed. We do verifications tied to in-stream flow scenario development. So this is on Hualaba stream repairing uses. And then this is Kanekakei stream at the Kamoku intake in Amolakai, Hualas and East Maui. We also do verification tied to water use reporting. So this is the Wai intake that intake and um this is also white koali um so overall we spend about 20 of our data or our field work time in in doing data collection and then or 60 doing data collection 20 doing biological data collection and then or 60% doing data collection 20% doing biological data collection um five percent doing verification work and five percent doing um responses to complaints and then you know other other efforts that take up time um include interagency meetings stakeholder meetings administrative means that sort of thing um I also want to point out the field work is not everything we do. We also maintain a surface water geodatabase, which includes streams, diversions, ditches, meters, and gauges. We maintain a surface water use database that is critical for understanding changes in use over time. And then we respond to requests for information, which can be quite substantial, especially when, like the counties are updating their water use and development plans, but we are not responsible for permits violations and request for determination. I think that's all I had. Aaron. And thank you for your work. You're you and your crew are really the at the heart of our ability to make quality decisions on the on the part of the commission. And when you talk about getting home wet and cold at 830 at night, it really resonates. But thanks again. Please express that to your staff as well. They are wonderful. I we appreciate them as every day. Thank you, Paul. Aurora. Oh, Commissioner. wonderful i i we appreciate them as yeah every day thank you paul aurora oh commissioner oh mike go ahead yeah yeah aaron key just informally uh how's uh how do you cooperate with dar and dofa and the water commission three separate agencies that really have differing responsibilities in managing streams, especially on state-owned land. Is that just kind of informal cooperation or do you have something written that kind of spells that out? There's nothing written in stone, but you know, they are our sister agencies and having, especially DOFA, having a large presence on the neighbor islands with base yards that can accommodate us. We appreciate them. Every time I need a favor, whether it's getting stuck in the mud or needing something delivered or somebody to sign off on something delivered or simply storing equipment for us, the DOFA base yards are instrumental. The staff, the foresters and branch chiefs have have assisted us in numerous occasions. And and we cooperate on on you know other deal in our issues that involve water. Where jurisdictions overlap dar similarly, although Dar has a much smaller footprint across the islands, and so we coordinate. You can't hear me? I hear you. Well, all right. Internet connection. We'll have your back shut out. Oh, right now. You're back. I think it's you, Kalil. We can hear. All right. Well, with DAR, they have a much smaller footprint, and their focus is primarily on marine ecosystems. And while they have jurisdiction over freshwater biota, they just have limited capacity to do the work. That's why when we have the ability to pool our resources, our staff, for example, to conduct biota surveys, it was instrumental. The DARS staff on Maui, or DARS staff in general, did not travel during the first year, year and a half of the pandemic. So when commission staff were able to get approval to travel to Maui to assist with biota surveys, it really helped out. I mean, it takes four or five staff to do a thorough habitat analysis, biota survey, and they only had two available on on island for such field work. So the fact that Sea Worm could coordinate and provide access to locations that maybe DAR didn't know or didn't have access to because Sea Worm has the contacts, it's really worked out well, especially on Maui. I think that's the heart of your question. Yeah, and I'm not surprised having DOFA has good history. And one other quick question. Do you prioritize dissemination and acquisition of data on state-owned streams, managed streams, or privately owned? Is there any sort of significance? We don't prioritize anything. Anywhere we have a data need, we try and figure out a way to collect the data with the constraints that we have a budget that is limiting. However, Aaron, I think what, coming into this, right, you folks have prioritized I fs is and the balancing of in stream and off stream needs based on a lot of those streams that were heavily diverted right historically. So we've we've prioritized those streams that have this tension or the need for balance of off stream and in stream and there's other streams that are purely not being diverted and so i think a lot of the focus is where there is um in-stream and off-stream needs that need to be balanced that's where the commission spent majority of its time since 2012 right when you guys started really ramping up ifs's so i think we're almost there we've gotten there's a couple more areas that we're going to focus and shift to, right? Southeast Kauai is one of them. But other than that, a lot of those, you know, historic plantation systems that had diverted a lot of water out of watershed, Aaron and his team have really kind of re-established kind of more of a balanced approach to protect streams where they need in-stream values to be protected, as well as balancing off-stream needs in that process. So there was some prioritization in that context. One more quick comment, and this is for Chair. I know as Dean Archer, you have many priorities and one needs more resources, but investing in aaron and his team right now is probably one of the best investments you could make at this time no i appreciate that mike i'm trying to figure out how can i save them time by having staff on the other islands um you know or how can we empower DOFA to be multitasked too? I don't know. I mean, I think I am really trying to break down silos within DLNR so that we are, there's better cooperation. You know, we can cross over. A lot of this is being done kind of informally, but I think we have a really good opportunity. And I think this legislative session is going to provide us a lot more needed tools. Oh, it looks like we did we lose. Do we have to push? I. Oh, no. Okay. Oh, that's a tv one oh just a tv okay but yeah no well taken mike um yes and you know i don't um i've personally really appreciated aaron's presentation i mean i know how i knew how valuable they were i didn't know how invaluable they really are to this department and the commission's ability to make informed decisions. I mean, we could not operate without them. So I do appreciate when Aaron is like, well, let's see if we can just kind of finish this item so we don't have to come back and schedule another meeting. Totally get it, Aaron, but probably the right choice. So, Aurora, you wanted to say something? Yeah, just a quick one, Erin. I noticed you flashed up and said the data were available. So is there, I mean, yeah. We are, we have a online data portal that is um i can have um it's data dot or data dash cworm cwrm.aquaticinformatics.net um the it is publicly available it doesn't require a login um the the caveat is that there are some quirks to it that we haven't quite ironed out including like the um not all of the stations that are real time are reporting in real time for example not all of the um usgs stations yeah like the batteries out the telemetries. It's just because USGS has their data and they have their disclaimers. I just, I think I've looked for it, but, ah, okay. That's what it meant, the TBs. But we have these ones. Okay. I'm just going to look this way. Yeah, even if just the link were available, I could see it being very valuable. So I'll go to Molokai because there are fewer dots. So this is the the Kamoku intake station. It says like the some of these statistics aren't really valid because we haven't been there in 3 months. So it's like you have to take it with a grain of salt a little bit. I think really great for helping people understand what's available for the public. Aaron, with those communities that you've been helping to support collect data or Department of Ag or other agencies, they access this now currently for data. more direct data sharing versus larger public dissemination because at this point because we can control the messaging and the limits of that data sharing but it is something that again hopefully with more staff will be able to get up to a point where it can be made available to the larger public real time when they can want can and want to access it but a lot of it i think in my discussions with aaron and his team is really managing the QAQC so that people don't know the limits of what they're putting, what the data is being used for. A lot of disclaimers. So for an example of the issues, this is the USGS gauge, and it comes in in real time. So this 4.1 cfs that's happening right now this 31.2 cfs this is the the last point that we downloaded at and so that was like march uh march 2nd so just looking at the colors you think wow something's going on there's there's a lot of flow down below but not much up above but you you have to understand what you're looking at the colors you think wow something's going on there's there's a lot of flow down below but not much up above but you you have to understand what you're looking at you could have different symbols anyways offline conversation but just uh we've tried i have my students use the usgs and just increasing water literacy these things are really helpful so when you guys are ready to i mean i'm fine sharing it with people i just um it's the big caveat is that there's there's a lot of um you have to dive there's nothing at face value that you can take but you have to dive into the data a little bit sure and um aaron and maybe khalil you mentioned priorities, I mean we aren't focusing a lot of his more reaction to as you say where there is competing interest, but are we doing data collection for climate change? So we've prioritized maintaining USGS gauging stations with really long records and especially in locations that are likely to be affected by climate change, so that we can better understand how that those changes in rainfall patterns whether it's more rainfall less rainfall, more intense storm events, but fewer of them more drought periods. So we we have that continuous record to look back at the trends over time. We've been able to add maybe 3 or 4 usgs stations just in the last 2 or 3 years that have long-term records that were discontinued like in the fifties or sixties or seventies that we're re-establishing so that we can do a deep dive into what is happening now relative to what happened 100 years ago. Yeah. Now help us with predictions for future, right? Well, in addition, one of our focuses has been last month we had PDKE come and present the Pacific Drought Knowledge, i forget the key right um exchange but we also work very closely with water resource research center um and really building up the mesonet program which is the establishment of these climate stations and that'll collect a myriad of different data sets that will help to hopefully inform you know some some climate predictions i i don't want to jump into the technicalities of it but that's how we've been really focusing our efforts is to support dr jambaluka um with the establishment once that's built out we should have that's that's one of the focal points of of the data collection well that should hopefully help us too on drought, predictions of drought and better management. Drought, flooding, just in general climate, better understanding of climate impacts. Excellent. Any, Neil, go ahead. Yes, Erin, I joined the other commissioners in thanking you for your work and long been impressed by both the volume of it as well as the value of it. So you've got four staff. What would be optimal? We had this conversation. I'll let the deputy and my supervisor comment. Obviously, if we were to maintain monitoring stations at the level which USGS maintains them. It takes the they assign about eight to ten stations per staff. So we have about 50 or 60 stations just for data hydrological data collection. We would need five to six staff, just not including biota, not including what we need for meetings or community engagement, that sort of thing, just to maintain stations. And that's existing stations, right? Existing, not adding new ones. Yeah. So let's just say double what we have as a round number. So is there any prospects for that that's a possibility, Kaleo? Well, that's a great segue to C2. So I'd suggest maybe we focus on closing the stream conversation and we can talk about resources. Well, let me ask one last thing of Aaron. You've talked about the scope of the data just highlight substance what's the most alarming thing you're finding what's the most gratifying thing you're finding um so on the on the stream flow side of things, we experienced in 2020, 2021, 2022, some extreme drought conditions in East Maui. And we measured low flows, lower than, as low as the entire period of record for the USGS station, for example, on Ho'olabanui or on O�pula or some of these streams that had USGS gauges for 50, 60 years. And we measured low flow conditions that were as bad, if not worse, than the entire recorded period of record, which is alarming. And it allowed us to quantify those low flow conditions under current climate conditions rather rapidly. We did a three-year study in about 18 months based on conversations with USGS on what it would take to do what we did. And that's just because we happen to hit it in an extreme drought condition. So that's that's the most alarming on the on the bioticide we've seen a lack of expected recruitment to streams like on windward, a wahoo like'ahole where there's been a lot of restored flow and I believe that's related to like vegetation management in the estuary there is a huge portion there's a huge reach of the stream that's clogged with halbush and just like in Kahana where the the lack of maintenance or the overgrowth of invasive vegetation has clogged the stream channel, it's really affected the recruitment of native species. I'm not saying there are no native species, but in a stream that's in essence fully baseflow restored, if not more so, we didn't see a single alamo'o at the 400 foot elevation or Nopili, which is really disheartening. You know, that watershed is not managed by DOFA per se. I think they manage for like Miconia and that sort of thing. But the overall, the watershed is dominated by non-native invasive vegetation. And so that I think plays a role. And we have yet to really strongly quantify that role, but that's part of why we are gathering the data is to quantify that role. Last week, we surveyed a higher elevation reach in Waikane and found four different native species, or three different native species. And that was amazing. i thought that was i mean waikane is uh doesn't have the the estuary clogging problem that wayahole does but it does have a like a water quality problem there are a lot of uh junk cars in the stream a lot of cesspools in the watershed there's you know other things that you might think would negatively affect um uh the the stream health. But we saw Naniha and Nakhea and Nopili and Holi-Holi at a higher elevation, higher than I thought we would see them. So that was enlightening. Thank you. Anything last? Thank you so much, Aaron, to you and your team. Mahalo for your good work. And I have to say thank you to Deputy and my supervisor, Dean, because they let me spend the money that I get to spend. So you have to congratulate them. They don't often say no, you cannot spend the money. Well, hopefully you'll get more. We're working out, working on it. But thank you so much for your presentation. I'd like to, we've got one more item, C2. What I'd like to suggest is rather than taking a lunch break, let's just take a really quick bathroom break. And then we're going to come back and finish C2 and that should be the end of it all right you Thank you. you you you Thank you. you you you Thank you. you Thank you. you Thank you. you you Thank you. Kjell, du har en kvartal. Thank you. Okay. We're back in session. We're going to go through item C2. Alejo? Let me try to see if I can get my screen shared. Try again. Do you want me to help? All right. I think I managed to figure that out. So per chair's request, hold on, let me close this door. All right, so per Chair Chang's request uh she asked that i provide an update to the commission on basically a recap of the past four months um our legislative journey through 2023 and so um this is really again very high level it's not going to get into a lot of the details um on on everything but just a high level of the Water Commission and our staff and our work at the legislature. So first I'm going to talk about the bills that we engage with, the testimony, some of the bills we've seen, policies that are coming forward, and then a discussion in a budget. So a lot of the conversation today has been about resources and budgets. I'll just share where we're at at the end of this legislative session okay so that's first stop all right so uh water bills of 2023 it was an extremely busy uh session on water uh and i think doh can concur with that uh there was a lot of focus which is great which means that we're focusing a lot on our needs and where we value water. So we tracked about 153 bills. Obviously not all of them we testified on. We were monitoring most of them, but there was some water nexus with what we worked on. We testified on 19 bills, not including hospital 300. And so just here's a quick summary of the bills and i've shortened and abbreviated kind of the points on them so if we can i think it'd be worthwhile for the commission to understand and see what was discussed because a lot of these that did not pass will be potentially alive right for next session so some things for us to consider and we'd love your feedback from the larger commission on some of these bills so the first one is efficiency standards hospital 194 it set minimum efficiency standards for a bunch of appliances but where we are focused was toilets and urinals obviously um we're supportive of of low low flow fixtures and just efficiencies in in our our built environment so we supported that um the next one was hospital 36 362, State Water Code Penalties. I'll go into that and others later, because there was another bill that had the same language that did pass. And so we'll highlight exactly what happened in that. House Bill 546 was related to the Fuel Tank Advisory Committee. This was one that we testified in support, but it increases the frequency of these meetings uh from i think annual to quarterly um that also asked to increase uh provide a budget to hold and host these still tank advisory committee meetings um that was one that we we engaged with and obviously supported with alongside Department of Health. House Bill 905 was related to sustainable groundwater yields, and this was proposing that you agent the Water Commission look at developing you know flexible groundwater model that moves kind of beyond the RAM model, or the round equation that we use to set sustainable yields to include other things, other public trust uses that we have an obligation to protect. So that includes traditional customary practices and groundwater dependent ecosystems. And try to better understand how can we factor in how much water needs to kind of remain in the ground in order to support these other types of public trust uses. House Bill 909 was related to water conservation. So there was a push to develop a water neutrality turf replacement program. So you can see that there's some end use management that's being considered by the legislature that would basically incentivize people kind of taking out lawns and replacing with turf. What kind of reductions in water use could we see based on that shift. House Bill 1212 was water neutrality. This was a goal to become water neutral by 2050. I think the intent was for the water that we use, we also develop or create equal amounts of water, whether that's through reuse, recharge, other types of process to source augmentation. House Bill 1303 related to water conservation. This was a pilot that was proposed in the counties to incentivize landscape alternatives. So again, some more of this end use management. And I think the pilot was for Hawaii County and City and County of Honolulu. That was hospital 1303. Hospital 1405 related to natural resources was to have with the Water Commission, DAR, and UH to conduct LIMU research and with the water commission dar and uh to conduct limo research and understand the needs or basically how um what are the water demands and needs of of native limos and this is building off of some of the research that has already been done in off the shore of kona but to expand this to additional um limo species and as well as better understanding invasive species impacts on that development. And then lastly, House Bill 1511 related to water resources was a grant in aid to the Board of Water Supply for seven monitoring wells and one export well and this is in response to the Red Hill situation where their sources have been offline. There's potential threats to their existing sources and wanting to better understand the extent of potential contamination. And so I will say throughout this session, we testified either in comment or in support, we did not oppose any of the bills that were presented that were in alignment with the what the water code anticipates and kind of what the commissioners historically asked us to to opine on shifting to senate bills so this is a continuation of those 19 bills that we provided testimony on so senate bill 71 relating for environmental impact statements again we just commented on this one we didn't oppose it but this one exempts drilling of wells on DOA land from completing, being required to go to Chapter 343 HRS to develop or do an environmental assessment. really rely um focused on potential threat to to aquifer or con wells acting as conduits especially in an agricultural environment and just making sure that um we believe the design standards our well standards really um protect against that contamination but there are other secondary human impacts um that that potentially should have been considered. So that's Senate Bill 71. Senate Bill 93 relates to reuse zones. This was to establish reuse zones, so where new developments that would rely or need non-potable water, it would basically require mandatory reuse zones. So you would have to develop a dual line system for uh potable would serve your potable needs and then you'd have an opportunity to reuse water for non-potable needs um within a certain distance so there was no distance this uh determined yet but that was what the bill contemplated senate bill 735 disposition of water rights we were second on this to land division but this focus of this bill was to build off of last session's bill but this one specifically would exempt in-stream use of water for commercial colo from having to obtain a water license so last session there was a bill that exempted in-stream use of water for color cultivation for tradition customary practices from water licensing. This one went a step further to include commercial. That was what was basically recommended, and so we supported land division in that process. Senate Bill 1066 relates to freshwater security, recommended a working group to develop or come up with a list of priorities to increase our water security throughout the state. And so this would help us to kind of look at the low hanging fruit, our biggest bang for our buck on where we can align as a state and invest in you know a more water resilient future a senate bill 1459 related to environmental protection um asked uh this was mostly a doh bill i think was the focus doh and border water supply but to put together a water quality task force to address some of the contamination that's being found in the waipahu Wells. And then lastly, Senate Bill 1573 related to affordable housing, a call for the establishment of a working group in the office of the governor to determine water availability and look at ways to streamline well permitting approval processes related to affordable housing. So those are the general bills that we provided testimony on that got hearings out of the 153 that we were tracking. Out of that list, two bills passed all the way through conference committee. So House Bill 1088 had a companion bill there, but House Bill 1088 passed and that was related to a declaration of water shortage and emergency. And then House Bill 153 with a Senate version, Senate Bill 44 about House Bill 153 passed is related to state water code penalties. And so the next two slides will go through each of those in a little bit more detail so you can see exactly what those bills look like. There were no resolutions, which is usually weird for the Water Commission. We usually have a list of resolutions, but none this year were assigned to us or had been directed to us to track um maybe i'll stop there and pause before we get into the two bills so any questions or reactions or thoughts before we move or something where are we on Commissioner tenure anybody any vacancies and do we need resolutions or where are we is somebody going off soon. meeting, but his position will be filled and has been filled this last session. Dr. Larry Miike will be rejoining the commission July in the July 2023. So he has been selected by the governor and confirmed by the Senate and will serve another four year term starting July 2023. So Commissioner Buck will transition off the commission so we can, you're coming next month, right, Commissioner Buck? Okay, great, good. But yeah, that's it. We've been fortunate to not have vacancies. We've been able to fill them. It is per the code, a different process than most boards and commissions. It has very explicit process that we have to follow. Councillor John Gallo, On it's quite time consuming but we've been able to accomplish that get names the governor governor getting names this and and been able to confirm every Commissioner, at least in the past four years, so that way we have a full full form full bottom. Mayor Mrakas, The Larry can tell us all the things we did wrong with the Navajo. No, I'm, it'll be great to, you know, continue the conversation with a lot of the work that we've been doing. Thank you. I'm just going to keep jamming. So the first bill, and I try to get images to kind of match what the intent of some of these conversations are. So the first one was House Bill 1088 on declaration of water shortage and emergency. And so this was an administrative bill that we proposed, the Water Commission staff proposed in the last administration under Governor Ige. And this really came out of the Red Hill Permanent Interaction Group conversations, our conversations with our AGs about the limits of our current statute and some of the Chapter 62 and the process that we, you know, as it reads, how really focused and we have to go through in order to kind of act in times of emergency. And so the intent here was really to look, what we did was we looked at the statute and it was really a chance, and here's a summary of the intent and the amendments that were made as part of the administrative bill. So it was to bifurcate shortage from emergency and why we recommended that was shortages that we can anticipate based on climate or based on droughts we have an opportunity to kind of work and plan for but in terms of emergencies for example like red hill um sometimes there's a need to act quickly and make orders or or act and so similar to like department of Health that has emergency orders and powers in their ability to act, we're looking for parity on the quantity side. So if we needed to act, that it would give the commission the ability to act, but it also would retain due process. So in the code already, it already anticipates that if an emergency is issued, that the orders would stand, but somebody can contest the orders, but we would have to go through that contested case hearing process in order to determine whether or not they have standing, whether or not they, those orders are overreaching. So that was the intent. The first part is to bifurcate shortage from emergency. Emergency in the code is defined in section three, but the only other time it comes up is in 62, under shortage and then an emergency. But in this case, the Red Hill situation really highlighted the need for us to maybe pull that out. So this is what we recommended, a bifurcation. It again, just reaffirms the commission's jurisdiction in and outside of water management areas, which is already in the code. It already says the commission has authority of water as a primary agency with that Kuleana, whether in or outside of a water management area. At the end of it, what we worked with and consulted with the boards of water supply and departments of Waterside based on the comments and ultimately the opposition of the board to incorporate consultation with the county and Department of Health before an emergency is issued with the intent need to, as this body is selected by the governor, confirmed by the Senate, as the experts on water management, that they need the authority and the ability to act in an efficient way in times of an emergency, but understanding that would have to be done with the county and the Department of Health. It also, again, would allow us to act immediately. And then one of the amendments we put in there is that we do need to look at shortages statewide um originally the way that the code is written water shortages fall under the water management area provisions um but we know that whether you're in a management area or not in a management area we have a need to really address shortages holistically no matter where you are and then just here highlights some of the testimony we received but ultimately the bill did did evolve throughout the session based on consultation based on outreach based on testimony we did receive and then unfortunately it did pass and so we are waiting for governors obviously decision to either approve the bill or not, and then some of the next steps related to this this statue. Michael Rhoadsley- This is Michael with a comments from the board of water supply really just focused on consultation or were they more deeper than that? Yeah, so the, again, high level, I didn't wanna go point by point for all of the testimony. There were some concern that the bill as drafted would circumvent the commission, I mean, the governor's authority under 127A in terms of governor and mayor's ability to declare an emergency. What we provided in our testimony and our responses to that comment was that you know similar to department of health in their regulation of water quality we're just looking at specifically related to water quantity and having the ability to do that even if the governor did declare an emergency which we would work with governor obviously as the agency to do we'd still have to come up with orders, right? We'd still, even if you suspended something, there still needs to be orders that need to be developed on how to address the emergency. And so it would, ultimately the goal would be is this body, right, who understands the worldview of water resources would be able to provide that expertise and guidance on the specific orders um to address the concern and so one of the other issues is a lot of times um people get confused with the kuleana of the board of water supply and the commission and so we have an obligation to all water users in the state the board is one of many right um or the departments of water supply one of many users we have to we have the the purview and the world view to be inclusive and to look at all users throughout the state so there were a couple um other concerns about there's no criteria in which and when an emergency can be issued but that is actually in the definition in the code of what an emergency is it has explicit um when there's insufficient quantity quality. E.J. That affects public health, safety, then emergency could be determined. E.J. um as well as it says the Commission it doesn't delegate it to the director or the Chair it doesn't delegate it to the deputy so this body as a whole, would have to make that emergency decision and as a body we have to have a sunshine meeting in order to do that so there's process um to provide due process to all people in the public including users to opine or provide feedback at least that's the way that we were trying to propose the bill as drafted and ultimately approved what was was the basis of LRF's opposition? Similar to a lot of the county's concerns about the governor should have the ultimate authority, governors and mayors should retain authority for emergency decisions. I, again, I have to go back and look at the point by point concerns from each of them, but in general, those are some of the ultimate concerns in opposition and and i will share with you this bill was not without well kaleo was doing a good job addressing the various comments that were timely presented primarily by the board of water supply and by the county departments and so adjustments were made to the bill and it went it got out of committee got out of conference committee and it was passed um i i just want to be very candid with you i think there are some who are concerned about the bill and have expressed their concerns to the governor's office so i'm not sure if the bill is going to get vetoed but we continue to stand um firm in support of this bill and that was our our comments back to the governor that we we support this bill it does provide additional assurances and we think we addressed all of the concerns but on the other side if we don't get the bill passed um in talking to Kaleo it's not fatal we still have the governor can do a emergency declaration. So, and I'm certain he will continue to consult with us, but that's just the current status. So just be aware. I think the governor has until, is it June? June 21st for veto. So just be aware of that. Okay, thank you. No, I just wanted to make sure we're providing the full context. So this is one of the two, let's shift over to the second one. So the second bill that passed is hospital 153 did have a companion Senate bill 44 I think but possible 153 made it through. it sets a minimum fine of $50 and a maximum fine of $60,000 per violation per day of an order or decision of the commission or any part of the water code. And so the intent, this was introduced, I think, by Senator Rhoads and a few others, but Senator Rhoads has been focused on this continuing offense clarification. So he in the bill it identifies what it cons what constitutes a continuing offense. We recommended the increase in fine as part of our testimony and it would ultimately meet it through the legislative process and this is to mirror the department of health's violation amounts per the proposed step ups in the Clean Water and Safe Drinking Water Act shifts. But also, so it will create parity between us as a water quantity and kind of state water code regulator with the Department of Health's water quality and federal water kind of purveyor or regulator perspective. So that way, water in general, as a public trust resource is protected at equal levels. And there's basically a disincentive to, you know, not break the law, right and get the required permits. And then it obviously highlights the need that we have to make a finding uh what the why we made the determination and established criteria and and and what the severity of the fence is so again the the gap is big 50 to 60 000 is huge um but it does uh give this body the commission the discretion and authority to to um levy based on severity of this the case um this bill flew through the legislative process uh there was you know support from Hawaii reef ocean coalition um initial opposition from an individual um at the end through conference committee um there was opposition by lerf but other than that there was no other testimony from any other agency individual throughout the entire session um and and ultimately as you folks have been privy to is as violations come before this commission there are those that willingly violate the code and those that don't and just they didn't know any better and so this code as passed or this bill has passed provides still the discretion to the commission to make that determination of whether the severity of the violation um and present something to the commission for decision making so those are the two that that's this bill so those are the two bills based on 153 tracking about 19 or 20 that we provide testimony on to made it through this legislative session on on policy and policy changes. Any questions about though this this bill or statue. So again, these two bills week for governor's approval or the future next steps right there's various options that need to play out about by July, we should have a better understanding of of whether these become law or not. A clay oh if this becomes so there isn't required rulemaking um in the legislation um we do have and and that's a great question commissioner we do have a penalty policy that the commission has approved to kind of outline severity outline criteria outline is this a first-time thing or are you a habitual you know lawbreaker um which has really provided the commission the ability to settle, right? Like we can come up with alternatives versus like a hard line violation. Once it gets into rules, it becomes very non-discretionary. So that wasn't included in this version of the statute. So we have that flexibility. And the goal is to bring back that water policy that penalty policy to the commission to kind of reflect this new the new valuation um if the commission wants to you know interrogate that a little bit more too or add additional criteria we welcome that as well um but that's hopefully in in maybe august or june july august we'll bring EAB – E And again, any violation, there is a due process. We work very closely with our AGs to make sure that we follow due process laws. If we are going to bring any violation to this body, there's usually a chance to cure. There's usually a notice that's provided, good faith effort. And ultimately, you know, our goal is to protect the resource. So if there's actually an impact to the resource that violation obviously would come before this commission body with, you know, higher fines or penalties. If there's not a severe penalty, then you won't see such high fines and penalties, but more so just a warning. And, you know, ultimately we're not here to make money off of people we want just people to protect the resource and be good stewards of the resource but this tool gives us ability to kind of help to incentivize or change behavior um in order to accomplish that goal okay i'm going to shift from bills to budget real quick if that's okay with the this commission so um i think it was in january again pre-legislative session this is where we were at um so just kind of to recap what we had as a base budget we had 27 positions 22 general funded five special funded and that's those are funded out of the state land development fund um basically the revenues generated from the board's uh the land division's use of um or leasing of lands throughout the state we had an operational budget of about 4.1 million um and then fortunately we've been really grateful and thankful that we've been getting two million dollar allocation kind of annually um for the past at least four years to help continuing our deep monitoring well development. So Erin did upon our stream gauging on the groundwater side better understanding groundwater resources deep monitoring wells are where it's at and so we've been asking for two million annually to at least continue to be able to develop the monitoring world statewide. So that was this is, this was our fiscal year 23, AKA the current operating budget we're in now. This will end June 30th, 2023 this year. So this operational funds, and this is the limits that kind of Erin talked about, right? That we have so much, most of this is for for personnel expensive staff um not our and then um that one million in um about a million in our cooperative agreement the us geological survey um so it leaves really little of discretionary funds for travel and other expenses so moving forward where are fines and any other fees so fines fees application fees and fines come into um our water resource management fund that's three three two six okay yeah so that that number there three three hundred fifty six that's our our ceiling on that special fund so we can spend up to that i i gotta look at what our current balance is in that um but that's where any of the fines go or the application fees that we do get um from from wells and or stream diversion permit applications uh one of the things to consider is you know our well construction and pump installation permit fees are $300 to apply for. And then our stream diversion and SCAPs are $25. So we do need to revisit those because the cost to evaluate those, to process them, are well beyond $25. Even on the well side now with Kapapa'a Kai and the impact situation and customary practice, there's additional time and review that goes into it. So those fees are very minimal compared to the amount of staff time. So I don't even, we are definitely not recouping our basic staff expenses just to process these permits. I understand that there's a balance right anytime we increase application fees there's push back um but though those definitely are are areas that we need to like revisit in terms of um funding and sustainable funding for us okay um here's just our request so i again this was prior we presented this in January. So in the EGA administration, we had four aquatic biologists approved, but we're only half of the year. This request asks for full funding. So this gets to your question about, Aaron, what's your team look like? So these four positions, I'm working with Dean to, they're gonna actually shift to general four positions, I'm working with Dean to, they're going to actually shifted general professional positions working with our human resources program, because that better fits the position description and kind of what we need them for. But the idea is, is those four would help both on the in stream side, as well as our permitting and regulation side. So the other side that does a lot of the permit review and compliance. And we also asked again for 2 million each year in fiscal year 24 and 25 in Governor Ige's budget. Moving forward in Governor Green, he issued, we made, there was a request for, you know, any additional funds that we'd wanna ask for. So we put in a request for new positions in groundwater and our survey branch, and this was really to build out Ryan and the groundwater team in order to really support the added workload from Red Hill, as well as some of the longer term groundwater research that we need to focus on. What we also asked for was increases to our base budget. And this gets to, and this is really, I frame it in the context, these are really climate related types of research, Chair, that you had asked. So getting to what Erin was saying, we asked for a $250,000 increase to our base, and that's to allow us to add five gauges a year to basically add an additional five gauges with USGS to our cooperative agreement so we can continue to build out this data set but that requires an increase to our base because this is not a one-time cost it's one time and operational over time in order for us to continue and get that longitudinal data. Similarly, what was great is a bill came up about LIMU research, but we had asked for about $250,000 and to continue the work with UH on their work in Kona to better understand LIMU, especially LIMU that are reliant on groundwater flow for production to take that to Molokai, because that is where a lot of the original water law and water case law came out, where there's a need for us to better understand the balance between pump withdrawal and the discharge along the coast to support tradition customer across designated points. And we also asked for funding to the Hau'i Mesa Net. Not all of these got into Governor Green's GMs to the legislature, but these again were asked in the budget. So fast forward three, four months later, this is where we ended. So I'm super grateful for this, but we managed to get some of the ask in, you know, working with WAM especially uh Senator Dela Cruz's office they've been super supportive of supporting the commission and our needs um so we added six positions to the water commission this past session that's basically an increase of 30 about 30 percent um what I did was I actually over since 1988 we've been pretty much static at about 15 to 20 staff for the past 30 years, and then we've gotten a huge bump. Last year we got four for aquatic biologists, or last administration this initial biennium we got additional six positions so four positions are going to going to groundwater regulation, really to help with the work added workload and support and and coordination with department of health on red hill this is not going away anytime soon related to the long-term aquifer remediation again our focus is aquifer health um and getting it and managing it in the long term defueling is one thing department of health is managing that but we want to make sure that um future water use and the aquifer use of that aquifer um that that's remedied and that we have some kind of understanding of what that future looks like so um but also one of the things that we do know in as part of this is better understanding um the current water use allocations throughout the island of oahu and actually throughout the state in management areas um and in a review of some of those allocations because there's been some that people have quote unquote sat on the commission has brought it up um prior is there's a review of non-use we've issued allocations but people haven't used it so why aren't we rescinding that the commission has authority to do it? What are the main issue and what working with staff has been, they've said, it's been a limit of resources and priorities. So this these positions came with that intent to have us focus in on the end use allocation evaluation. So that's kind of the goal is to get these four positions moving on those types of things. And then also tied to the water penalty bill, House Bill 153. Throughout the session, we had said, you know, if with the increased focus on compliance and enforcement, we don't really have focus on that portion. A lot of times staff manage that on top of their, you know, normal other work. So we asked for two positions and those will, we're looking at putting them in planning office to help support our groundwater and our surface water branches in water compliance and enforcement, whether it's IFS reporting, well, water use reporting and the water allocation or water use permit condition and allocation. So six new positions got added. So now we're out of the 20s and into the 30s for the Water Commission. Again, just one of the things I try to remind people, we have a statewide purview. We have 33 positions for water. The larger department has a thousand positions as a right. So when we look at equity, I'm a constant advocate if we can't live without water, but we still have a long way to go and advocating for resources to really do our job and do it well, for the benefit of the public trust and the people who wait. So the shifts are there below and the majority of the operational budget increase from the 4.1 to 4.5 and then ultimately 4.8 come with those six positions. There really wasn't an increase in a base budget for expenses or travel. So now that we've gotten the position next biennium or supplemental year, we'll probably ask for additional funding to support Aaron and his work, Ryan and, you know, the team with Red Hill and them doing and getting out in the field working compliance, etc. There's going to be a need to ask for increase just expense expenses to cover expenses. And then we did also get 2 million each year in fiscal year 24 and 25 for deep monitoring wealth development statewide so ultimately we we did really well I think for the water commission in our operating NCIP budgets as well as some of the policy additions that will help us to do our job and continue you know be better stewards of this resource so with that I think that's a good enough summary for now on our legislative- Thank you so much, Kaleo. Kaleo worked very hard running back and forth from the legislature, responding to questions. We've got a really good committee chairs in the Senate side for Water Land, Senator Inouye, and on the House side, linda ichiyama they were both excellent champions for um sea worm any questions on that yes yeah well done well done kaleo and team do we have the capacity to accept philanthropy? Yes. Yes. Yes. So have we thought about that at all? Is there any bandwidth, the leadership to think about some of the sources we might tap to get a significant gift to take care of a precious resource? I haven't had the chance to. We're open to it. I haven't been able to strategize or come up with the time really to frame what is the ask. We definitely know the budget needs. I ultimately I think the closest we've focused is the Freshwater Council with the boycott petition. And and it's not necessarily us accepting the philanthropic support, but it's really to support others in the community, whether a water purveyor or private agricultural system just becoming better stewards that sometimes is even better if it's given to out that way, then it to come directly to the Water Commission as a State agency. We oftentimes have more strings than anything else right to to accomplish that ultimate goal. Where we've been focusing in and before I continue anymore staff and our branch, Chiefs and our legislative team. Michael Yoshinaga, Neo Fujii, Alexa, our legal fellow all of our our branch chiefs, Ryan, Katie, and Dean, as well as Erin, really put in the time this session to kind of get us to where we're at. So it takes a team to get there. But with Katie, Katie's been the lead now that she's been on the team to really help us look at federal funding. And based on lately, we have a good chance we're gonna get quite a substantial amount of federal funding from support from our entire congressional delegation this year. We're waiting for the final budget to kind of get through, but this will be helping us with, we'll be able to leverage our Demodding Well CIP with federal funds to basically double almost triple down um on our resources and then um to help us to support us in other um water audit and well abandonment programs so that's really where i think our core is versus philanthropic funding um but on the philanthropic there's a big push you know migration from just funding worthy activity to funding impact and transformation you can't know your impact if you're not measuring so when we think about some of the gauging and the and the expense of that putting in that system and maintaining it and getting the data and analyzing it there might be some room there. So just a thought. I will welcome your expertise in the philanthropic center on how best maybe we could approach that. Happy to chat with you and the team about it and connect with some other people who know more about it. And Neil, that was one of the purposes behind the governor's, the green fee. That was to create a vehicle for philanthropic donations. But we still we do have, we can establish a trust fund to receive funds to feed donations or philanthropic. But I will tell you this year, DLNR, I think for the first time, the legislators really understood that DLNR has lapped capacity, but they have exceeded expectations in many ways. So at the end of session or at the close, the budget bill, they were quite generous to DLNR, all of our divisions. Our challenge is going to be we got to spend the money that we got. So we are working on that but there are some other very major policy initiatives that have an impact to dll as well but i did want to cover a few things because the um the water commission in light of red hill has really kind of pushed us all to look at better coordination between agencies government entities so i do want to provide you an update that over the last month there's been some major initiatives um that have um for that have come as a result of both the collective as well and in particular red hill so i think you might have heard about two weeks ago through legislative leadership and the governor's office and the sitting county of honolulu there was a press conference on a unified statement in support of not only the cleanup of Red Hill, but the assurance of clean fresh water for the future. So this unified statement is a launch of a collective body of government representatives from both the governor's office, the administration, as well as the legislature, and the city and county of Honolulu to hold the Navy accountable. And so all of these agencies bring individual Kuleana responsibilities or expertise. And this is a desire to ensure that nothing's falling through the gap. So this group will continue to meet probably over the next four months to come up with strategies to address not only again, the cleanup, but the future sustainability to ensure there's fresh clean water for the people of City and County of Honolulu. Similarly, and this was even before this unified statement. Governor Green has established the governor's water council made up of different representatives of which both Kaleo and I, Department of Health, the AG's office, Department of Ag, D. Hhl sit with the governors and talking about water water issues statewide. So that's a current initiative that's also going on and then there is as Kaleo mentioned the HF's Water Alliance. So Kaleo sits on it and I'm going to now join that. The last thing is, you know, I got a call from Ernie Lau who wants to meet with us on a monthly basis. So Kaleo and I will meet with Ernie and his team on a monthly basis to talk about water issues. So I think that there is a, there are numerous efforts to ensure that there is better government coordination on water. Water is obviously a priority. I think everyone recognizes in light of Red Hill, the vulnerability and the fragility of our resource and how we need to we can no longer operate in isolation, but we have to work in collaboration. So I mean, I think that there's a lot of good things things that the water commission has been asking for and you know i know that mike and aurora and all of you have just been pushing about you know we need to get we need to get this under better control so i think there is a movement by government to recognize we have to do better as government. So Mahalo to the Water Commission to really pushing a lot of those limits and initiatives. But I think the legislature and the governor's office and the city and county of Honolulu recognize we all have to work together on this. So that's kind of a summary of both the legislative and then the policymakers wanting to have a better coordinated effort. Red Hill can happen again, and it can happen anywhere. We could have a storm, we could have a natural disaster that exposes our system. So I think we need to be in a better position. So mahalo to the Water Commission and the staff, Seaworm staff, for really kind of stepping up and shedding light on a lot of these issues so that's kind of a summary I think um where we are where we're planning to go and yes all right may I ask a question yeah hi as as presented in the workload and some of the legislative initiatives as you increase your staffing to comprehend all the duties that need to be accomplished will you continue to be oahu-centric it seems that a lot of the work are outside of that you're right you're you're absolutely right um you know wayne and i have as a matter of just policy and leadership here at dlnr i am really trying to empower our island staff we are being criticized by the community for being O'ahu centric. So I have told all of our island staff, whether you're land division, DOFA, DOBAR, DAR, we, one, we have to, and I'm trying to get everybody out of silos. So whenever an issue comes up, we are triaging with all of the different divisions so that everybody is putting in their manao but we are also at the same time trying to build capacity within our neighbor islands as well so that um because travel is you know we learned that through covid i mean we have to have capacity on each of these islands to support us so we are trying i am trying consciously to build that capacity on each of the islands so that we are supporting each other i'm also trying to do multiple within the divisions how can we you know when an issue comes up how can we share information resources um knowledge to be much more effective if i can also add chair so um of the aquatic biologists that we talked about two of them will be on um will be on maui with the workload that aaron shared and the amount of stream work that we do have on maui that'll be the first that will be on Maui with the workload that Erin shared and the amount of stream work that we do have on Maui that'll be the first that would be the first sea worm shift to out of out of Honolulu which I will say is a culture shock for an institution that's only been Oahu centric so I am working with staff to make sure that we have the communication in place, the support systems built, but like other divisions that do have base yards outside of O'ahu is to really look outward and see where we can do that. Another thing that we're looking at is as we start to unveil and look at options, maybe even for some of the planners or compliance people, if we can actually recruit from the Outer Islands where there's a need for more jobs um and provide teleworking which is now kind of an option that's evolved postcode as an incentive uh to get and recruit really good quality staff because some people don't want to be on a walk where they want to stay in kauai or maui or big island um we're still working through the complexities of dherd and our hr process to make that happen but yes i am having coming from the neighbor island um we we are looking at ways to provide a diverse kind of approach to our management and regulation so yes yes no and and we're also trying to um i am trying we spend a disproportionate amount of our time on litigation, contested case hearings, court cases. So our leadership team, Kaleo, Laura Ka'akua, and myself, we will be going out to each of the islands, doing listening sessions, and really trying to engage with the community so that we're trying to be more proactive and develop that trusting relationship I I know a lot of a lot of community members don't trust deal in our um so we're working on that and I think the trust comes through physically just being present it is by going into these communities and listening to them on what are their issues what are their concerns what are their priorities and so i'm hoping that that kind of time that we spend will develop trusts and likewise we'll have commensurate reaction you know response with lessening the amount of time we're doing litigation. Not always, but I'm hoping that we will be able to channel some of that energy into something more productive. Michael, did you have your hand up? Yeah, and free advice. I'm happy to give you some free advice. I've worked with seven different DLNR chairs, looked at a lot of realizations, but you have some divisions that have regional authority where their staff is at a level where they're both responsible to make decisions on the island. You have other divisions that are very Honolulu centric and things need to go back. And so I'm happy at any time to give you some structures of potential and i know reorganizations are just horrible i've been through in my share but to really manage the islands so you can break down the side the silos between the divisions there are some personnel reorganizations and certain divisions that are just not that that's not how they're aligned it's not their history that's not how they make decisions and i think there's some real opportunities there i'm happy to offer you some free advice on your request thank you we'll take you up on that any other comments neil yeah uh you were speaking about from your larger, broader deal in our perch, but from the Water Commission standpoint, or this division, do we have any active litigation right now? Yeah, we have current contested cases that you've approved. We haven't started that process. A lot of it's and getting um working with ag's right so julie's here um making sure that we're we the landlord takes up a lot of the contested case capacity yeah we we don't have much and we've been really trying our best to to walk through and walk with community and applicant and in the regulation and stewardship of resources. So right now, I think there's only three pending or two pending. Two pending pending plus we have appeals of of former contested cases that we that we are defending in the appellate courts and. And there's the land division water, our peace, but those are not your kuleana. Yeah. So. Yeah, so there's- There are like lots of those. So we have, so there's, just off the top of my head, there's the, sorry, just to answer the question directly, the Waike'e, Wailuku Water Company, not Waike'e, Wailuku Water Company, Pale'a'a'a'u'ko'o'ch Waste Company company that's in that's got in a capacity case there's the cavella ifs um that is pending us coming back to the commission to either grant or deny a country's case um there's a petition for that and then there's there is technically the the ota well um that was the Kona Well contested case petition. So there's two petitions that we have to bring back to the commission with some kind of resolution or action for next steps. But that would be the only three at this point that are pending and then the Navajeha appeal. So that would be four. So those are the four kind of judicial types of processes that we'll be engaging in. Well, it feels like the nature of the issues that we're involved with, it could be a lot more, and I really want to credit staff and Chair Chang. I mean, you mentioned that people don't trust us. People trust Aaron, I'll tell you that. I mean, we hear that all the time. He's out there in the field and and so forth and there's we get a lot of good feedback uh on on his work so i'm optimistic that as we have more neighbor neighbor island representation by our team uh you know that'll uh things will fall in line and and we'll avoid these contentious and expensive and delaying the delays of contested case and all this uh and litigation and so forth yeah now if you guys say you guys have done a lot of really good work here to sort of address a lot of those community concerns I think having a lot of the community engagement process has also helped with respect to water commission um lessen those numbers we're still you know we're picking up we're picking up the slack on the land side well but you took a big step with the the whole ranching uh yes yes and i applaud the chair you know and uh the openness of uh that's been a nagging issue and i think it seems like progress made no thank you okay so chair just um item d just maybe quickly go over real quick with the commissioners okay um next meeting is june 20th so it's our standard third tuesday in july um we're recommending to if all these are tentative still obviously but wednesday um wednesday july 26 is the next one so it's the last wednesday in july um so it's a shift um chair your schedule clear but it's more for the rest of the commissioners just to um if you can flag that and let us know and then august 15th we're back on schedule to the Tuesday. Oh, yes. Very good. Thank you. So that's it, Chair. I just want to make sure we covered that. Chair, I did have one more on the government matters. When you mentioned Wailuku, didn't the mayor, the new mayor of Maui, make some statement about wanting to buy them and is there any progress that we're aware of of uh the county acquisition of the for the major purveyor for what nobody helped yeah so chair i can provide an update on that one um we we did hear from department of water supply staff that the mayor mayor vissen is is interested in that the they are going through their due diligence on that acquisition um having heard that we already proactively reached out to the department of water supply um and their new leadership to kind of walk through the navajo decision that the commission made and that the the obligations that they would have to commit to if they were to take on that Kuleana in lieu of Wai'iki Water Company, and then discuss some potential future opportunities, right? Some benefits of maybe making that acquisition. That was with Erin and Dean, myself, and then Eva, the Deputy and Director of Department of Water Supply and their core council, just better understand what they're getting into if they take that on. So we're working on it. Sorry, that's tied to legislative. Okay. Related to staff time and budget of legislative matters. Yeah. But yeah. Thank you. Back on agenda. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Anything anything else anything final before we adjourn okay thank you thank you we're adjourned thank you